SPEAKER 0
This segment is a very short note about the difference between frequentist and Bayesian inference. Now when we think about frequentist statistics, we think about our parameters as being fixed values. They're unknown, but they are values that do not change. And so, for example, as we think about doing hypothesis tests for parameters. We end up looking at this idea of a P value. So the probability that our sample data are more extreme. Was produced from the model. With the fixed parameter values as stated in that null hypothesis. And those parameter values as being fixed, they are not changing. Now, our P-value ends up providing evidence against the null hypothesis. So whatever value of the parameter is stated in the null hypothesis, the P-value is going to give us the level of evidence against that hypothesis. What the p-value does not give us is any kind of statement on whether the null hypothesis is true and the probability of the null hypothesis being true. Let's contrast this with a different. Thought And that different thought comes from Bayesian statistics. In Bayesian statistics, parameters are random variables. So parameters are allowed to vary. Because of that, they have a distribution. Before we collect data. The distribution of our parameter value is called a prior distribution. That prior distribution puts together all of the information that we know about the parameter value so far. After data collection, we take the data and we update the prior distribution. And that gives us what's called a posterior distribution for the parameter. So essentially we've taken our prior knowledge. Added some data. And ended up with our posterior knowledge. So we've, in a sense, updated the knowledge that we had about the population parameter. Because parameters have a distribution, we can make probability statements about their value. And so that's something that's very different about Bayesian inference versus frequentist inference. Now, which one's the right one? Well, there isn't a right one. they both have their pluses and minuses. But when we think about the two options, it can be helpful in certain situations to apply the Bayesian framework. While in other situations, applying the frequentist framework makes the most sense.
