SPEAKER 0
In module 2, we are going to learn a lot of statistical methods that deal with two variables. These are some of our more common statistical methods that are used in practice. To start, we will study the 2 sample T test. At the beginning of many of these methods, we will start by discussing the types of variables and data where these methods will apply. Then in this case, we'll talk about a hypothesis test for the difference in two population means. We'll look at an example, and then we'll compare this to the randomization tests that you've been working with so far. So the variables that we'll be working with right now are a quantitative variable and also a categorical variable. The categorical variable will have two categories, and those categories will indicate then the sample or the population membership. Our data collection really could be one of two, possibilities. The first one is that we have one sample, but contained within that sample is really uh information from two populations. And so we would divide our sample into two groups based on that population membership. Another option is that we have um 2 samples, so we have 2 separate samples, one from each population. In either case, our data collection revolves around this quantitative variable and then being able to compare the values on that quantitative variable between the two populations. So the parameters that we'll be working with for our quantitative variable in population one we will call that mu sub one for our mean. Our variance will be sigma squared sub one, and then our standard deviation will be sigma sub 1. Likewise, for our population 2, we'll refer to the mean as mus sub 2, the variants as sigma 2, sub 2 squared, and then the standard deviation as sigma sub 2. Which which population you choose to be denoted as either 1 or 2 does not matter. Once you've picked it, then you keep you keep the label then straight from then on out. The data that we have when we look at it in a data table will look similar to what we have on this lecture note. We have the values of our quantitative variable. We can think about those as values of why and so we would have. The quantitative variable, um, we would have observations of that variable, um, for each one of our population members in our data table in our sample. And so we would um think about these as going from um the first observation for that population down to the last observation for that population, which we would denote as N1. We would have the same thing for population 2. our observations for population 2 of the same quantitative variable, so we can see that the population 2. Information, uh, the sample where it came from is sitting right there and then you can see the observations would go anywhere from 1 to 2, down to the last observation from that, uh, population in our sample, and that is N 2. Once we have our data, then we can calculate our summary statistics. And so when we're looking at our data, those are our sample values, and so we can calculate the average of those values. We can calculate their variance and we can calculate their standard deviation. And so you can see we can calculate those sets of values for both groups. And if we think about what that would look like in our data table, then we would be taking this set of values and calculating the mean, the variance, and the standard deviation. And then we would also be taking this set. Of values and doing the same thing, calculating the mean, the variance, and the standard deviation. Now when we think about our population means, a very common thing to ask ourselves is, are those population means the same? Or are they different? And so our hypothesis test will look for um whether those two population means are the same. And typically we think about this hypothesis test as testing for the difference in the two means. Now obviously if the difference is zero, then that means that the two means are the same, but the difference in the means is kind of the more common presentation of this type of test. And the reason for this is while we almost always test for the difference in these means being zero or something different, you can actually test for the difference in the two population means to be something other than 0. Um, no one usually does though, but um, it is possible. And so usually when this particular hypothesis test, this particular method is presented, it's usually presented as you'll see it in the lecture notes. So our null hypothesis is that the difference in the population means is equal to 0. The alternative hypothesis is one of the three options depending on. Um, the, the, uh, goal of the study. Now, if we are interested in the difference in the two population means, then of course, we would be interested in looking at the difference in the two sample means. Now we know that sample means will vary from sample to sample. And so we need to understand how they'll vary from sample to sample. That's our sampling distribution. If the null hypothesis is true, and the difference in the two population means is zero. Then if I look at this quantity here, which is Z. That's the difference in the two pop sorry, the two sample means divided by. Um, the, uh, standard error of that difference, so that would be sigma 1 squared over N1 plus sigma 2 squared over N2, and then taking the square root of that value. If the null hypothesis is true, then this Z has a standard normal distribution for large sample sizes, so when N1 and N2 are large. The only problem with this result is that. We have values. In that quantity that are population parameters. Those are generally unknown. So to keep going and being able to do something even if we don't know the values of sigma 1 squared and sigma 2 squared, the first thing that we'll do is we will use the what's called equal variance assumption. We will assume that although the values of sigma 1 squared and sigma 2 squared are unknown, they are equal to each other, and we'll call that common variance just sigma squared. With this assumption in place, and if the null hypothesis is true, then we have our quantity of Y 1 minus Y 2 divided by sigma times the square root of 1 over N1 plus 1 over N2. That is going to be equal to our Z random variable. And that will have a standard normal distribution, as long as we have large sample sizes for N1 and N2. Then we're still in that situation where we don't actually know Sigma. We don't know its value. So we're going to estimate that value with our data. The data, the statistic um that we use to estimate this common variance is called a pooled variance or a pooled sample variance. Usually, um, people will uh reference this as sigma or sorry, as Squad sub P, P for pooled. The formula 4, the pooled sample variants. Is essentially taking each one of the groups. And their sample variants, and then weighting it by how many observations were in that particular sample. Since we've already calculated the sample variants for both groups, we can use um that value and um or those values in order to get our pooled sample variants. So either one of these formulas will work um for that pooled sample variants. Now after we get the pooled sample variants, we're going to replace the value of sigma in our previous formula with the value of Sp, so the square root of that pooled sample variance. When we do that, um, we no longer have a Z value, uh, we have a T value. This T value or the T test statistic has a T distribution. And the degrees of freedom for the tea distribution. Uh, in this application is N1 plus N2 minus 2. Tea distributions have different degrees of freedom. And it controls the shape of the distribution. The larger the number of degrees of freedom of a T distribution, the closer it looks like a standard normal distribution. Tea distributions are bell shaped. But they differ in uh from the standard normal distribution in that there is more probability in the tails of the distribution. We will use then this T distribution to obtain our p-value. Large values in magnitude of RT test statistics indicate evidence against that null hypothesis of equal population means. We will take and quantify this evidence with our P value. Our P-value is the probability of obtaining the test statistic T or a value more extreme, if the null hypothesis is true. A value more extreme means in the direction of the alternative hypothesis. So if we're looking at our um alternative hypotheses, um, the difference being not equal to zero or the two means just not being equal. Then we would have both tales of the distribution. So it would look something. Like this, so we would have our test statistic. And it's absolute value. And so RP value would be. Taking both of those tails and adding them up. Now, luckily, both of those tails are the same. The T distribution, as you might remember, is symmetric around 0, and so that T distribution then will have equal tails. If our alternative hypothesis is a less than, so that mu 1 minus m2 is less than 0 or just mu 1 is less than 2, then we will be doing the left tail. And then if we have an alternative hypothesis that is greater than 0 for mu1 minus m2 or that mu1 is greater than m2, then we will be taking the right tail. OK, so let's look at an example of a hypothesis test for the difference in population means. The example that we'll use here comes from the creativity data set we've been working with during the first couple of weeks of this semester. Here I have summarized the sample statistics for each one of the groups. You'll see we have the mean. We have the standard deviation. And we have the sample size. The first thing that we'll need to calculate is the pooled variance. And so you can see following the formula for the pooled variants, we will take um the sample size for the first group minus 1, so that's 22, and multiply that by the standard deviation squared or the sample variants. And then we'll do the same process for the second group. Then we'll go ahead and divide by the um N1 plus N2 minus 2 value. This is 45. The number is correct, um, but the slide had the wrong number on it, so I will repost that, um, so that you have the correct version. OK, so if we're looking at, uh, wondering, is the mean creativity score of the extrinsic group, is that equal to the mean creativity score of the intrinsic group, or is the difference between those two populations means equal to zero? The alternative hypothesis is simply that those two means are different. We're not specifying a direction. We're not specifying that one mean is less than the other or one mean is greater than the other. Using our uh sample statistics and our pooled standard deviation, we will go ahead and calculate the test statistic. So we'll find the difference in our two sample means. Then we'll divide that by the square root of our pooled variants. And then we'll multiply that by 1/23 plus 1/24. Those are our sample sizes. For the test statistic, we end up with 2.926, negative 2.926. So if I'm thinking about what that would look like. In our tea distribution. Here's my value 0. It is fairly far out into the left tail. And my P value then. Drew that tail just a little bit too big over there. Will be taking those two tails and adding up the probabilities in those tails. And so when we get that value, it will be 0.0054. So our test statistic is fairly far out into the tail of the T distribution, and this T distribution has 45 degrees of freedom, because that's what N1 plus N2 minus 2 is. So for a p-value of around 0.005, we have very strong evidence. That the mean creativity score for the extrinsic group is different. Then the mean creativity score for the intrinsic group. Now, this is not the first test that we've done, uh, asking this question. We had previously looked at the randomization test. On the left side of the screen is the distribution of the difference in our simulated means for the randomization test. The P value that we obtained in doing the randomization test was roughly around 0.0049. Depending on your um particular run of the randomization test, you could get a slightly different p value, but it should be something very close. And you can see here that we have a histogram of the distribution of the difference in those simulated means for our 10,000 simulations. That shape looks somewhat familiar, right? So if we look at this particular distribution. If I drew that a little bit better, I'll try again. But if you look at this particular distribution. One more time. If you look at this particular distribution, there we go, um, you'll notice that bell-shaped symmetric distribution. And that's exactly what we have for the sampling distribution that comes to us from the 2 sample T tests. On the right side of this um uh lecture note is the um T distribution with 45 degrees of freedom. And so this is what our distribution of our Test statistic is in this case. And again, you see that symmetric bell shaped distribution. The P value that we obtained is very close to the randomization test p-value. It's 0.0054. Now the question is, will this always happen? And the answer is no. The creativity test. The sample size for that for this situation isn't really that big. Uh, it's 23 and 24. However, the observations are fairly well behaved. Um, each group of the 23 and 24 observations is uh fairly symmetric. Um, and unimodal. And so in cases like that, even with what we would consider to be fairly small sample sizes, the two sample T test ends up showing us something that's very similar to the randomization test. That won't always be the case and we'll be looking at some different methods as we go through uh module 2 that will help us um if that becomes an issue.
