SPEAKER 0
In this segment, we'll be talking about another method that comes into play when we have two variables. The general area that this is called is usually matched pairs or paired data or something like that. So we'll call it inference for paired data. We'll talk about the variables in the data collection procedure, and then we will discuss the hypothesis test for the variable or for the parameter that we're interested in, and then we'll also discuss the confidence interval as well. So the variables that we have here, we still have 2 variables, but they are both quantitative. And in addition to being both quantitative variables, they are similar. They're essentially the same variables. So they're collected using the same procedure with the same units, etc. The data collection then is a random sample of size N from a given population. And the observations on each one of these variables are matched or paired in some way. So sometimes we will have a situation where we will have the observations coming from the same case. So the observations will come from, for example, the same person or the same plant, but they'll be separated by time or space or something like that. Another type of situation could be that the observations are coming from matched cases. So they're different people or different plants, but those uh cases are related or matched or paired in some way. What we would like to be able to do then is compare the observations on these two similar quantitative variables. So here's a couple of examples of paired data. Let's say we were wanting to study the ages of heterosexual partners. So if we are collecting our data, um, each one of the pieces that we would be collecting from our case would be a heterosexual partnership. And we could, in terms of looking at ages then um look at, well, what's the age of the wife in that partnership and what's the age of the husband in that partnership? That would be our two variables. The observations of variables 1 and 2, well those are related. Since we know when you take a heterosexual partnership, um, usually people are partnered with others of similar ages. Another type of example. Uh, let's say that we are looking at a study that has, um, uh, giving people the GLP one medications, and they do that for one year, and they're interested in weight loss. So the cases would be um those participants in this study. And the two variables would be their weight, but the variables would be collected at different times. So variable one would be the weight prior to the study. And variable 2 would be the weight at the completion of the study. Now, observations of variables 1 and 2 are related. They come from the same person at two different points in time. So in both cases you can see where these observations, if they come from one person or from two people, uh, they have something that is connecting them together. We're observing the same variable in the first case, it's ages. In the second case, it's weight loss, but we have those either assigned to paired cases in the case of the heterosexual partners, or we have them assigned to the same case in the case of the GLP medication study. So when we're looking at our quantitative variables, if we think about the individual variables, we would have um the mean of variable 1 in the population, so that would be mu 1, and we would have the mean of variable 2 in the population. That would be mu 2. So we could have, for example, um, the mean age of wives in the population of heterosexual partners and we could have the mean age of husbands, um. In uh heterosexual partnerships in the population. However, given the data, given the variables that we're collecting, um, and our data collection procedure, the observations of our two quantitative variables are related to each other. They are not independent. And so we will define a new parameter. We'll call it mu sub D. I've used a capital D here. Other resources will use a lowercase d, but it's the same idea. It's the main difference between the two values between those two variables in the population. We can also look at the population variants of that mean different or of those differences as well. Now if we think about what our data would look like, um, what we would be interested in is not necessarily the individual quantitative variables, but what we're really interested in is the difference. So for our first observation. We would have the value for the first quantitative variable, the value for the 2nd quantitative variable, and what we would really like to do is then to look at the difference. We'll call those differences capital D sub i. So that'll be the difference in the values of the variables for the Ith case. And once we calculate those differences, we can go ahead and get the mean. Of those differences, we can get this the variance of those differences. And we can get the standard deviation of those differences. Now notice when we're looking at the data table. There are and. Differences So we might have 2. Timesn values for our quantitative variables when we look at them together, but we only have n differences and so since everything is based on the differences, we have N for our sample size. Now when we think about our population parameter m sub D. What we're really interested in is looking to see, is there a difference, right, in the mean values of the two quantitative variables in the population. So if I'm looking at, for example, of the ages of wives and the ages of husbands in the population of heterosexual partnerships, I might be interested in looking at is the average difference in those ages equal to 0 or is it something else? The null hypothesis is that that mean difference is equal to zero, and the alternative hypothesis will depend on the study goals. We could have a not equal to a less than or a greater than alternative. We could have a hypothesis test that assigned a different value other than 0. But similarly to how we saw that situation related situation in segment one. No one ever does. OK, so if we're interested in looking at the population mean difference, we are going to have to estimate that with the sample mean difference. So that is the mean of all of those differences in our samples. So that is our D bar. If the null hypothesis is true and we have a large sample, a large sample size, then we have that if we take D bar and divide by sigma subd over the square root of N, that will have a standard normal distribution. Now unfortunately, That formula includes sigma. Sigma is a population parameter and is generally unknown. So we're going to need to estimate that. We can go ahead and take our sample standard deviation of our differences and plug that in for the unknown sigma sub D. For large sample sizes. Then this quantity will have a T distribution. It will have N minus 1, the sample size -1 degrees of freedom. And of course when we're thinking about our our test statistic, then we know that if that value is large in magnitude, that is going to indicate evidence against the null hypothesis. So we'll quantify this evidence with the p value. So in our case, we will have a T distribution with N minus 1 degrees of freedom, and if we have a not equal to alternative, then we'll take both tails. So here's our value 0. Let's say our test statistic is right there and it's absolute value and negative absolute value are right there. And so the shaded area, both of those would add up to be our key-value. And of course, the T distribution is symmetric around zero, so they're both the same. If the alternative is a less than 0, then we will pick the left tail of the distribution, and if it's a greater than 0, we'll pick the right tail. For our example in this section, we will be looking at a fairly well-known data set called the schizophrenia twins data set. So there is a question about whether there are any physiological indicators associated with schizophrenia. In looking at these physiological indicators, they can always be affected by genetic or socioeconomic differences among people. However, um, if we have identical twins that were raised together, um, their genetics are the same, very close to the same, um, and their socioeconomic statuses should be also the same. And if we have identical twins where one of the twins has schizophrenia and the other one does not, then we can study differences, and those differences would be controlled for the genetic and socioeconomic factors. So the researchers used MRI. To measure uh volumes of several regions and subregions in both twins' brains. The volumes are in cubed centimeters. The two variables that we have are uh dealing with the left hip hippocampus of the brain. And so the unaffect variable is coming from the unaffected twin. The affected variable, its value is coming from the affected twin. Here is the data. You can see there are um values for the unaffected and for the affected twins. And since they're twins, they are matched. And we would be interested in learning about the difference in the values on this quantitative variable between these pairs of twins, and so we'll go ahead and take the difference between the two values. That is noted in the data table as an extra column, um, and that extra column usually is added to the data table. A lot of times different programs like our um will. Have ways of doing an analysis like this where you don't have to explicitly put in the different column in your data table, kind of like doing that though. I think it helps conceptually. So I went ahead and did that in the presentation. All right, so for our null hypothesis then we are testing for no mean difference in the volumes of this left hippocampus between unaffected and affected twins in the population of identical twins. The alternative hypothesis is that there is a difference. So for our data, we have some sample statistics that are calculated. We have that the sample size is 15. The average differences is 0.199. And then the standard deviation of those differences is 0.2383. Putting those together into calculating the test statistic gives us a T of 3.2289. Looking at the P value, then, we have a T distribution with 14 degrees of freedom. The alternative is not equal to. So we're going to be taking both tails of the T distribution. So you can imagine our T distribution looks something like this. And we have 0 right here. Our test statistic is pretty far out into the tail of the distribution. And so the negative test statistic would be also. Out into the tail and the area. In both of those added together would be the 0.0061. So at that p-value, we would consider that to be very strong evidence against the null hypothesis. And so we have very strong evidence that um there is a difference um in. The mean uh volume of the left hippocampus between unaffected and affected twins in the population of identical twins. Now, if we think about that result of having a very strong evidence of a mean difference. It might be helpful to be able to quantify that mean difference. And so we will do that by first going back to the sampling distribution for. D bar. For large sample sizes and we have this statement about the quantity in the middle. D minus mu subd our population that mean difference divided by S subd over the square root of N. We have that probability statement that it is between the negative and positive alpha 2 percentiles for a T distribution, and that has a probability of 1 minus alpha. If I take this inequality. Up here And I go ahead and solve 4. Muse of D. That will give me my confidence interval for that parameter. And after a little bit of algebra, we find that we have D bar minus the upper um value from the T distribution with N minus 1 degrees of freedom. And then we'll multiply that by S of D over the square root of N. On the upper side, we'll do the same calculation, but instead of a subtraction, we'll have an addition. So we usually write. Our confidence interval values. Together with that plus or minus sign. So we'll have D bar, plus or minus T. Uh, the upper alpha 2 percentile, and then we'll have S sub D over the square root of N. So our example from the schizophrenia data set. Our sample statistics are repeated here, and we can plug those values into our um formula. And so we end up with a value of 0.0667 to 0.3306. And so we can interpret that confidence interval by saying that we are 95% confident. The main difference in volumes of the left hippocampus between the unaffected twin. And the affected twin is in the population of identical twins is between 0.0667 and 0.3306 cubed in centimeters, so cubed centimeters. And so we were clear about that the affected twin is first. And the, or sorry, the unaffected twin is 1, the affected twin is 2. And so as we see we have positive values for the confidence interval. So this is telling us that on average when we look at these twins, the main difference is going to be um. Positive and so that's telling us that the unaffected twin on average is higher than the affected twin. Now it feels like with the um. Several means and those types of things that it would be. Maybe easy um to get a little confused between what we've talked about in this segment and the previous two segments on the two sample methods. The two sample methods, it's important to remember a couple of things. First, we have two populations that are under study. And the structure of our data table. Has one quantitative variable and one categorical variable. The categorical variable indicates that sample or population membership. And our goal is different. We would like to compare the mean of the quantitative variable between the populations. The paired data that we just talked about. That only has one population under study. In our schizophrenia example, that population. Is identical twins. The structure of the data table then is different. In the data table, we have 2 quantitative variables measuring the same thing. We don't have a categorical variable at all. And our goal is different. Our goal is to determine the mean difference between these related values of our two categor, our two quantitative variables. So when we think about these two methods, what I always tell students. I remember the data table. The structure of the data table helps you in determining which one of these two methods is the appropriate one to use either because you have one categorical and one quantitative variable, so you know you need to use our two sample methods, or because you have two. Of the same category quantitative variables, and you know you need to use our paired data.
