SPEAKER 0
Our second aside at this point in module 2 is to talk about confidence intervals and to compare those to something called credible intervals. Confidence intervals come to us from frequentist statistics. Remember, the idea here is that the parameter value is fixed and unknown. Our confidence intervals are calculated using our sample statistics. Sample statistics vary from sample to sample, and so therefore, our confidence interval will vary from sample to sample. It's random. Over a very large number of samples. The 1 minus alpha of the intervals will contain that fixed but unknown parameter value. However, if you take. Any confidence interval. And you look at it, so one confidence interval. The parameter is located either in the interval or outside the interval. There's no randomness associated with that one confidence interval and whether the parameter is included or not. The probability, this 1 minus alpha that we work with, that is describing the process of obtaining the confidence interval formula, and we've seen that a couple of times in the lecture notes. So in our lecture notes, we use the sampling distribution to obtain that probability statement. Turning that probability statement around gives us the end points of our confidence interval. Now that contrasts. With something called credible intervals from Bayesian statistics. In Bayesian statistics, the parameter value is a random variable with a distribution. And we combine the prior distribution, that information that we understand about the parameter before we collect the data. And then we combine that with our data to obtain our posterior distribution. Because of this, we can make probability statements about the parameter using this posterior distribution. So for example, we can get a 95%, what's called credible interval for a parameter. So for example, we can say something like the probability of the parameter is in this interval is 0.95. That is not a statement that we can say looking at a confidence interval in frequented statistics. Now you might be wondering, OK, what's the connection? What are we talking about in terms of the connection between confidence intervals and credible intervals? Well, as it turns out, in almost all cases, you can set up the analysis to get a credible interval that will have the same values as the confidence interval. So because of that, because you can go through the Bayesian process. And end up with the values from the frequentist process in the confidence interval. Many people will interpret um a confidence interval as a credible interval and make no distinction between the two. So that is something that you are free to do if you would like. Um, you don't have to make a distinction between a confidence interval and a credible interval you can interpret your confidence interval as a credible interval if you would like.
