SPEAKER 0
While hypothesis tests are helpful in determining whether we have evidence of a difference in our two population means, if that hypothesis test does find strong evidence of a difference, we would like to follow that up with, well, how much different are they? What would be the difference in those population means? To do that, we will look at a confidence interval for the difference in our two population means. We'll review the ideas of the variables and the data that come from and can be used in this particular situation. We'll look then at the sampling distribution for the difference in our sample means, and then we will develop the confidence interval for the difference in the population means and look at an example. So as we've talked about in the previous segment. The variables that we have here are 1 quantitative variable and one categorical variable. That categorical variable has two categories, and those categories are indicating the sample or population membership. Our data collection can be one of the two situations. We can have one sample that contains two populations within that sample, and so we would divide our sample into those two groups based on the population membership. Or we could have 2 samples, one from each population. We're still interested in this idea of comparing the observations of the quantitative variable between our two populations. Our parameters, then our population 1 and population twos mean variance and standard deviation. And which population you label as 1 or 2 does not matter as long as you keep the labeling consistent throughout. Our data table then will have two columns, one for the quantitative variable and one for the categorical variable. The categorical variable is indicating which population sample of the data is coming from, and the quantitative variable then is the value that we're going to be comparing. And so you can really think about, we have these set of observations of our quantitative variable. And that's coming from the sample from our, our first population, and then we also have a set of values for the same quantitative variable, but it's coming from the sample from the second population. With these two sets of values in our data table, we can calculate our summary statistics. So we would calculate the mean, the variance, and the standard deviation for both groups. When we're thinking about inference for the difference in the two population means, our goal now is to really to obtain a reasonable value for that difference given the data that we have. Now it would make sense that if we want to estimate the difference in the population means. Ah, we should look at the difference in the sample means. But we know that the difference in the sample means varies from sample to sample. And so we're gonna need to understand that variability. We can start out by looking at the large samples for N1 and N2. And if we do have large samples, then we have that this quantity here usually referred to as a Z. Has a standard normal distribution. This quantity then is the difference in the sample means, minus the difference in the population means, and then dividing by the standard error of the difference of the sample means. But unfortunately The standard error formula includes. Population parameter values. So it includes sigma 1 and sigma 2. Those are generally unknown. So in a similar way to the last segment. We will go ahead and first assume that those sigma 1 squared and sigma 2 squared values are equal to each other, and we'll call that equal quantity, that uh common quantity, sigma squared. With this assumption then, for large sample sizes, we still have this quantity. As equal to Z or a standard normal. Now, while we've assumed that these population variances are equal. We still don't know what their value is, so we'll go ahead and estimate that. And so we'll use the pooled variants as we did in the last segment. Once we've calculated the pooled sample variance value, then we can replace sigma and put in SAP or the square root of that pooled sample variance. And we end up with something that is a T distribution. The degrees of freedom is N1 plus N2 minus 2. And that will be the T distribution for large sample sizes, for N1 and N2 being large. Now When we think about obtaining a confidence interval. We're going to use this information from the sampling distribution. To set up a probability statement. The quantity in the middle. That is our T distribution. And for any T distribution, we know that its values. Will look like this. And we also know that if we are between, for example, these two values. We can get a probability. Of 1 minus alpha. And each one of the values then. In the tail will be. Alpha over 2. This alpha 2, this alpha 2 is usually referred to as the upper alpha 2 percentile from a T distribution, and in this case, with our sampling distribution information, it's N1 plus N2 minus 2 degrees of freedom. Now what we're gonna do with this probability statement. Is we are going to take. The middle parts. Of this inequality and we are going to solve it. For our parameter. In this case, mu 1 minus m2. When we do that, it involves doing some algebra. But what we end up with is what you see here. We end up with the difference in the sample means minus that T alpha 2 value, times the pooled standard deviation times the square root of the 1/1 plus 1 over N2. And on the other side we have the difference in the two sample means plus then the same value that T alpha over 2 times the sample the pooled sample standard deviation and then times the square root of 1/1 plus 1 over N2. These values that we have then. In this probability equation, those are our confidence interval values. So those are the end points for our confidence interval. And so here we have a 1 minus alpha, change that into a percent confidence interval 4, mu 1 minus m2. Now in this particular case, these are very close to the same values. The only difference is here is a minus and here is a plus. So this happens a lot for confidence intervals, so we usually use the notation plus or minus. So the first time through, use a minus, the second time through, use a plus, and that will give you your end points for your confidence interval. So here you can see that there's this kind of general pattern. Um here we have, this is the estimate. And then here we have. Some information about. A distribution And then we are multiplying that by a standard. A So that standard error of our estimate um is where we have that um pools uh standard deviation times that square root formula. OK, so let's look at an example of a confidence interval with the creativity data again and I obviously did copying and pasting. So, um, anyway, so we have our um data and our sample uh statistics. And so we calculate our pooled, um. Uh, sample variants. And then we go ahead and plug in those sample statistics and pulled sample variants into our formula. So here you can see we have the difference. In the two Um, Sample means We have this value, which is that T, that upper alpha over 2, value from the T distribution with 45 degrees of freedom. And then we'll have the square root of our uh pooled sample variants, and then the square root of our um one over our uh sample sizes added together. What we end up with when you plug and chug the numbers is a minus 6.997 to 1.291. Now when we think about what this tells us, the difference in the means has two negative values. So we can see that for our confidence interval, both of those values are in the negative side. So we are estimating that the first group, the extrinsic group. Has a smaller population mean than the second group, the intrinsic group. And we can of course interpret that difference. We're 95% confident because that is the level of the confidence interval that we calculated that the mean creativity score of the extrinsic group is between 1.91 to. Let's see, uh, 6.993 um points lower than the mean creativity score of the intrinsic group. And I think it's possible that um these numbers are rounded just a little bit um more, so we'll fix that. We'll put in 91 and then um we'll put in. That for the value 7. OK, so as we can see, not only did we do a 2 sample T test in the previous segment that let us know that there was very strong evidence of a difference in these two means. Now we are able, after this segment to be able to summarize that difference. And also to be able to put a confidence level on that summary.
