SPEAKER 0
In this segment, we'll introduce a non-parametric method for comparing a quantitative variable between two groups. This method is called the Wilcoxen rank sum test. First, we'll begin by reviewing some of the issues with the two sample T test and confidence interval and the assumptions. And then we'll introduce the Wilcox and Resum test and use our creativity data to provide an example. So with the 2 sample T test, we would like to compare the value of a quantitative variable between two populations. And so our method for doing so is to either calculate a hypothesis test or a confidence interval for the difference in the two population means. Now, one of the issues that can occur in doing this is that obviously these population means would be estimated by the sample means, so the Y bar 1 and the Y bar 2. But as we've seen in the previous segment, sample means are highly affected by outliers. And also we have to have values for all of the observations in order to calculate the sample means. So this method may not be appropriate if you have outliers or if you have other issues with your data. We also made in doing the two sample T test and confidence interval, a couple of assumptions. The first assumption was that the population variances are equal to each other. Now, this can be a difficult assumption to test. And so we usually use a rule of thumb. That rule of thumb is that this method is appropriate if the ratio of the two sample standard deviations is between 1.5 to 2. We also have this question is that well if the population variances are very different from each other, do we really just want to compare the population means, or are there other aspects of the distribution of this quantitative variable between the two populations that would be important for us to study? We have also assumed that the sampling distribution of the difference of the two sample means is a normal distribution. We may have a situation where one or both sample sizes are not large enough for us to assume that this is true. And so if we run into issues with either one of these assumptions, then this method may not be appropriate. So in these cases, let's look at a different type of method that we can use that will help us reach our goal, which is to compare the values of the quantitative variable between two groups. This method is called the Wilcoxson rank sum test. The nice thing about this test is that it does not depend on the mean, so it is resistant to outliers. It only requires ranking observations. So if it can be used in situations where some of your observations might be in a range of values, like we saw in the previous segment. There are several ways to set up the null and alternative hypotheses. Some will talk about comparing population medians, others will talk about comparing the distribution. So we're going to use the comparison of the distribution of the quantitative variable, and in the null hypothesis, this distribution is the same between the two populations, and in the alternative, the distribution is different. So how will we calculate the test statistic for the Wilcoxson rank sum test? So the first thing that we'll do is we'll combine the data from the two groups into a single variable, single data set. And we'll order the total observations, so that's N1 plus N2, from the smallest to the largest. Then we'll go ahead and assign ranks. So by that I mean that the smallest observation gets a rank of one. The next smallest gets a rank of 2, etc. all the way up to the largest observation, which will get the rank N1 plus N2. Now, if you would have observations that are tied, then you would average the ranks for those observations. So let's say the 4th, 5th, and 6th observations are all the same. So then we would average 45, and 6, and all three of those observations would be given the rank of 5. So it's possible to get ranks that are um fractional, right, decimal ranks, and that totally is fine with this method. Then we'll calculate a um. Intermediate test statistic, if you will, um, and that is taking the first group and adding up the ranks for the observations in that group. And then to that we will subtract the minimum value you can get for the sum, and that value is the size of the group times 1 plus the size of the group divided by 2. Now, what do we expect if the null hypothesis is true for this value of W? So the expected value for W will simply be N1 times N2 divided by 2. And its variance will be this formula down here. So, N1 times N2 plus, or excuse me, uh, multiplied times N1 plus N2 + 1 divided by 12. All right, so we have the value for W. We have, if the null hypothesis is true, what we expect its value to be, and we also have its variants. So we can go ahead and form a test statistic. When we have large sample sizes for N1 and N2, typically what we would want would be to have the sum of N1 and N2 be at least 20. Having N1 and N2 be at least 20 apiece is even better. But when we have large sample sizes, then the sampling distribution of our Z statistic here, which is taking the difference between W and its expected value and dividing by the square root of its variants, that distribution is well approximated by the standard normal distribution. Now you might be wondering what is this? Subtracting of 0.5 in the numerator. This is what they call a continuity correction. What that subtraction does is allows us to better approximate the distribution of the statistic on the right with the normal distribution. The distribution of the statistic on the right is discrete, so it's bumpier than a standard normal distribution, which is nice and smooth. And so that subtraction of 0.5 in the numerator makes the approximation just a little bit better than it would be without it. So once we get this Z value, we will get the approximate P value then. Um, it's a two-sided p-value, so we will take um our standard normal distribution. Centered here at 0. We'll take the absolute value of our test statistic. And The P value. Will be the area in both tails. And since that's the same, we'll just take the area in the right tail and multiply it by 2. So here's an example of our Wilcoxson rank sum test, as applied to the creativity data set. So if you take the scores in that data set, all 47 of them, and you rank them from the smallest to the largest. In our group one is designated as the extrinsic group, because E comes before the I in intrinsic. So when we apply our statistic to the extrinsic group, we take the sum of the ranks for that group, which is 426 as compared to 702 for the intrinsic group. And then we'll subtract off the uh N1 times N1 + 1/2. So that will be a total of 150. Then we'll go ahead and calculate the expected value if the null hypothesis is true, that is 276. The variance, if the null hypothesis is true, is 2,208. And so we'll go ahead and calculate our Z. Our Z is, uh, once we do the calculations, equal to 2.67. Then we can turn 2.67 into um a p value. So we would have two times the probability of being greater than that. That is a fairly small p-value, 0.0076. So at that P value, we would have a very strong evidence that the distribution of creativity scores is different between the extrinsic and intrinsic treatment groups. Now notice, because the null hypothesis is comparing the distribution of values, we actually have a slightly broader statement here than what we were able to obtain in the two sample T test. The two sample T test was comparing the population means. And in this, uh, Wilcox and rank sum test, we're able to actually compare the distributions between the two populations.
