SPEAKER 0
In this segment, we'll introduce the need for something called non-parametric methods. For non-parametric methods, the idea is that we in some situations will need methods that do not require the type of assumptions that we have made in doing our two sample T test and our inference for paired data. The best way to describe the need for non-parametric methods is to introduce some examples. So the first example comes to us from educational research. The researchers were interested in. Randomly assigning 28 9th grade students, and they wanted to look at different training methods in coordinate geometry. So they had a conventional way and then a modified way of training students in this area. After the training was complete, students were asked to solve a coordinate geometry problem. They completed, uh, recorded the time that the students took to complete the problem, but there were 5 students in the conventional group who did not complete the problem in the time allotted, which was 5 minutes. So we have 3 variables collected from this study. We have the amount of time in seconds that the students worked on the problem. We have which group they were in, which treatment they received, either the modified or conventional, and then we wanted to indicate if a particular uh student. Completed or did not complete the problem. And so we would call that variable sensor. So censor is 1 if they did not complete the problem and 0 if they did. So if you're thinking about comparing the time. Um, between these groups. Typically we would think about using a method like inference for mu 1 minus m2. But in this case, we have a problem in doing the calculations required for that method. As you know, we would have to calculate both the sample mean and standard deviation for both groups. Now, while doing that for the modified group would be possible, we would run into problems in trying to calculate the sample mean and sample standard deviation for the conventional group. What value for time do we put for those 5 students who did not complete the problem in the time allotted? Truly, their value would be greater than 300 in seconds. But how do you calculate a mean or a standard deviation when your value is greater than 300? Now it doesn't make sense to use the value 300, because that's not how long it took the students to complete the problem. They didn't complete the problem. And so, if we are thinking about inference for mu 1 minus m2, we have an issue because we cannot uh use our data to estimate our sample mean and sample standard deviation. Another example comes to us from food safety. Food safety experts um studied different ways to eradicate E. coli from hamburger. So in a study, there were 6 samples that were exposed to a controlled treatment, and 6 samples that were exposed to an active treatment. After the treatment, then, the number of E. coli in the samples was determined. And so this number of E. coli in the samples is what they call in colony forming units per gram. And so, if you Google that, um, you'll get some more information about how exactly they determine, um, based on these samples, how many E. coli, um, are in the sample. The treatment is either the control or the active. And so typically what we would be thinking of is we'd like to compare the number of E. coli colonies that occur between these two groups. And so if we think about doing inference for mu 1 minus m2, so our two sample T test, this of course is based on the sample means and the sample standard deviations for both groups. And everything seems to be going OK until we look at the observations. So the control observations. Um, are all between 0.17 and 0.57, except for This value. Right here. That is not a typo, it is 2.5. And you can see the active um observations are between 0.02 and 0.19. OK, so there is a very large observation in the control group. And that very large observation will overwhelm the sample mean calculation, the sample standard deviation calculation um for the control group. And it will then overwhelm everything related to uh the tea test. And so What do we do? Does it make sense to still use that type of method? Well, certainly if it's possible in this control group to occasionally see these really large numbers compared to the other values. We obviously aren't meeting the assumptions that we have for our two sample T test. And especially in this case, with such small number of samples, um. We're really not going to be able to apply uh what we've previously learned. And so there's a need to have other methods in cases like the ones we've just seen, that allow us to still compare quantitative values. But be able to do that without uh assuming some of the things we need to assume when we apply the two sample T test and the inference for paired data. So in our upcoming segments, we will be looking at Non-parametric method for two samples, which is called the Wilcoxson rank sum test. And in a different segment, we'll be looking at uh non-parametrics for paired data. There are 2 that are used on a regular basis. One of those is called a sign test, and the other one is the Wilcoxson signed rank test. And so we'll talk about these non-parametric methods coming up in the next segments.
