SPEAKER 0
In this segment, we'll introduce two non-parametric methods that can be used with paired data, the sign test and the Wilcoxen signed rank test. First, we'll review the inference for paired data that we've talked about in a previous segment, and we'll look at the assumptions. Then we'll talk about the techniques of the sign test, and we'll use an example, and then we'll also introduce the techniques for the Wilcoxson signed rank test and go through an example. So in our inference for paired data, we based so far the inference on the T test. So in comparing observations of two similar quantitative variables from the same cases or from matched cases, we use the hypothesis test and confidence interval for the population mean difference, so mu sub D. This was based on the sample main difference, D bar. Now, sample means are highly affected by outliers. And you must have all values for all observations in order to calculate a sample mean difference. And so using this method may not be appropriate if you have outliers or you have other issues in your data, as we've seen in previous segments. We also assume that the sampling distribution for our sample mean difference D bar follows a normal distribution. Now we may not have a large enough sample size for this assumption to be true. And so when we think about applying this method in those cases, the results may not be accurate, and the method may not be then appropriate for us to use. So the first non-parametric method we'll talk about is called the sine test. We're still comparing observations of our two similar quantitative variables from the same cases or from matched cases, but our method is now going to focus on the population median difference instead of the population mean difference. So the population median difference is equal to 0, then becomes our null hypothesis. And the alternative is that it is not equal to 0. Using the population median difference allows us to, one, not have to worry about outliers. Because the median is not affected by outliers, and 2, we don't have to worry about having a situation where even if we don't have values for all of our differences, as long as we have a range of values, we can then still apply the method of the sign test. We also don't have to worry about that normality assumption for the differences. So how does the sign test work? So we'll start by doing the same thing. We'll calculate the difference between the two values for the IF case. Our test statistic S is to count the number of positive differences. Now, if we have a large number of positive differences, then we're going to calculate the p-value as shown here, where we will take and um add up. The number of uh combinations of N choose X, where X goes from the number of positive observations up to the sample size N. And then we'll multiply that times 2 times 0.5 to the end. If we have a small number of positive observations, then we will also calculate and add the number of combinations of and choose X, but now X will go from 0, then up to the number of positive differences s. And we'll also multiply that sum by 2 times 0.5 to the end. Now you'll notice here when we're looking at the differences, the only thing that matters is whether the difference is positive or negative. That's it So um it doesn't matter if they're outliers because we're not looking at the particular value and it doesn't matter if we have a range of values as long as we can tell that the same quantitative variable values um as long as we can tell which one's bigger, then we can apply the sign test. So we'll go back to the schizophrenia data example that we used in talking about inference for paired data. In this example, we have uh sets of identical twins, and we've looked at the size of the left hippocampus. So the unaffected variable is the size for the twin without schizophrenia, and the affected variable is the size of the twin width. So our null hypothesis is that the population median difference in left hippocampus size between the twin without schizophrenia and the twin with schizophrenia is equal to 0. And the alternative is that that same quantity is not equal to 0. So if we take the difference between the left hippocampus sizes for the 15 pairs of twins in our data, 14 of them have a positive value for the difference if we define the difference as unaffected minus affected. And so since this is a large number, um compared to the total of 15, we will calculate the P value as taking the sum of the combinations. We'll have 15 choose 14 and 15 choose 15. And so that will give us, um, actually, um. Um So that will give us 16 actually, um, but at any rate, and then we'll multiply that times 2 times 0.5 to 15. When we do that, we get the P value of 0.00098. So at that P value, that is a very small p-value as we know, and so we have extremely strong evidence that the population median difference in left hippocampus size between the twin without schizophrenia and the twin with schizophrenia is not equal to 0. Now, we have given Up, um, some information about comparing the quantitative variable between our two cases, um. In terms of just looking at whether the difference is positive or negative. So, instead of doing that, let's look at the Wilcoxson uh sorry, signed rank test. And the setup for this is really very similar to the sign test. We're going to base this method on the population median difference. But the differences in this case need to be symmetric. If the differences are symmetric though, this is a better test to use than the sign test, meaning that we're more likely to detect a positive or negative population median difference if one exists. And so our null hypothesis is that the population median difference is 0, and the alternative is that it's not 0. And so to put together the test statistic, we will first calculate the differences. And then we will take the absolute value of those differences and rank them. If we have differences that are the same, then we would average the ranks. Once we have the ranks of the absolute value of the differences, then to those ranks, we are going to add the sign of the difference. So when we look at positive differences, they'll have positive ranks, and if we look at negative difference, differences, they'll have negative ranks. The test statistic we'll call V and V is the sum of the ranks for the positive differences. Now the particular distribution that is used to get the P value is a special distribution specific to the Wilcox and signed rank test. So this distribution is something that's built into a program like R and can give us the P value for a particular test statistic. So going back to the schizophrenia data, we will have the exact same null and alternative hypotheses. And we will then look at the differences, and as we've talked about before, 14 out of 15 of those differences are positive. In absolute value, when you rank those values, the only negative difference has a rank of 9. So if I add up the ranks of all 15, um. Uh, observations, and I've looked just at the 14 positive ones, I end up with 111. Now, according to the um distribution, then the P value is 0.0020. So again, that is very strong evidence that the population median difference in our left hippocampus size between the twin without and the twin with, um, schizophrenia is not equal to zero. So again, these two methods allow us to uh look at paired data without having to rely on the assumptions that the inference for paired data requires.
