SPEAKER 0
In this segment, we'll start our study of inference as it relates to two categorical variables by looking at comparing two proportions. We'll first start by looking at the variables and the data collection, and then we'll look at the sampling distribution for the difference in sample proportions. We'll use that to get the confidence interval for the difference into population proportions, and then we'll look at an example. So the variables as we're starting out here are a grouping variable. So the grouping variable gives us the population or sample membership of the observation, and in this particular case, we're just going to be looking at two different groups. So capital I for this variable, the number of categories will be 2. For the response variable, the variable that we're interested in comparing, that will also have just two categories. So capital J will be equal to 2. And because we have just two categories, we usually refer to the different categories in general as success and failure. So the population proportions that we are interested in are looking at piece of one, which is the proportion of successes that are in population one. And piece of two, which is the proportion of successes in population 2. And we would like to compare these population proportions then between our two populations. So when we look at our data table, we can see that we have our categorical variable of interest, and that the observations within that categorical variable are either a success or a failure. And the grouping variable is the variable that lets us know the population slash sample membership of the observation. And so here we've arranged it so that all of the observations for population 1 come first, and then the observations from population 2 are then come next. So when we're looking at our sample information, we will be looking then at comparing. The set of success and failure values for our sample from population 1 to the set of success and failure values from our sample from population 2. We can take and cross classify then the observations of our categorical variable and then our grouping variable. And we get a 2 by 2 contingency table. You can see for each one of the two groups, we have the number of successes. And the number of failures. Total we will have N 1 observations from group 1 and N2 observations from group 2. From our data in the contingency table, we can calculate our sample statistics. Our sample statistics, when we're summarizing a categorical variable, they're just proportions. So we have our sample proportion, Phat sub 1 is the proportion of successes in sample one. And that will be the value Y11 divided by the sample size and sub 1. Likewise, we'll have pea hats of too. That will be the proportion of successes in sample two, and that will be Y sub 21 divided by the sample size and sub 2. So if we go back up to the contingency table, you can see that our sample proportions can be calculated by taking The observation in the success column and dividing it by the total. And so that gives me my pea hat one. And then likewise, those two values will give me my pea hat too. So now that we have our variables and data set up, we would like to think about our goal. Our goal is to obtain an interval of reasonable values for the difference in P1 and P2. So we would like to take their difference as a means of comparison. Now, given the data, we will estimate P1 minus P2 with Phat 1 minus Phat2. Now we know that these sample statistics are never equal to their corresponding population parameters, and we also know that they'll vary from sample to sample. So in order to get that interval of reasonable values, we need to look at the sampling distribution for the difference in our sample proportions. To start, we need to make a couple of assumptions. There are really more conditions, and those conditions, uh, you can see the formulas there, but really what these conditions are is ensuring that each one of the samples has enough successes and failures in the data. So if you look at calculating. N1 times Phat one. And N1 times 1 minus Phat1, that is actually Y11 and Y12. And same thing with N2 times Phat2 and N2 times 1 minus Phat 2. That is also N212, or excuse me, Y21 and Y22. So these conditions are the same as saying Y11. And Y12 are both greater than are equal to 10. And Y21. And why 22. are both greater than or equal to 10. So that those observations in the contingency table are not too small. Now some resources instead of using 10 here, will use 5. I think really there's probably maybe a little sweet spot somewhere between 5 and 10. Um 5 might be a little bit, um. To lenient, and 10 might be a little bit too strict. Um, but we'll stick with 10. Usually it's not an issue for there to be at least 10 successes and failures in the data for each one of the samples. So as long as those conditions hold. Then we have that the distribution of the statistic which we're calling Z. Which is the difference in the sample proportions, subtracting off the difference in the population proportions, and then dividing by uh this formula under the square root, which is our standard error. This Z is well approximated by the standard normal distribution. So what does that mean? Well, that means that while this distribution might not exactly be a standard normal distribution, the standard normal distribution does a great job of approximating the real distribution for Z. So we can use then our standard normal distribution to work with this sampling distribution for Z. So from the sampling distribution, we can then set up a probability statement. So we have the Z. In our standard normal here. Which is centered at 0. It's symmetric around 0. And so our minus Z alpha over 2, and our plus. Z alpha over 2, in between will be probability 1 minus alpha. And then in the tails will be alpha over 2. And because we are using an approximated distribution, this probability isn't exactly equal to 1 minus alpha, but it's really close. And as we saw in previous segments in module 2, we can take this probability statement. And solve for the parameter. And so the parameter here is P1 minus P2. So when we go ahead and solve for that parameter, we end up with a probability statement as you see at the top of the slide. We're left with a difference in the population means, um, and the lower. End point will be the difference in the sample means minus that Z alpha over 2 times the standard error formula for the difference in the sample means. And I went ahead and put the standard error formula down below rather than including it in this big long probability statement. Then we also have for the upper end point of our interval, we have the difference in the sample means plus that Z alpha over 2, then times the standard error for the difference in the sample means. So as we did with a couple of our other confidence intervals earlier in module 2, we can go ahead and calculate then a 1 minus alpha percent confidence interval for the parameter, and the parameter here is P1 minus P2. And since each one of these endpoints is the same except for we subtract off the Z alpha over 2 times the standard error for the left endpoint and we add it for the right endpoint, we can use the plus or minus notation. So our confidence interval then for P1 minus P2 will be the difference in the sample means plus or minus Z alpha over 2 times the standard error of the difference in the sample means. So let's look at an example of how we can apply this confidence interval uh to answer a question for us. So let's look at an example of When we're thinking about response rates for surveys. It's really important to get a high response rate. That helps us um with the overall validity of the results of our random sample. We really want to make sure that the people that are selected for the random sample participate. If we get a smaller response rate, then we're wondering how much of our supposed random sample is more of a convenience sample or a voluntary response sample or a biased sample. So there was a study to look at one method for trying to increase the response rate for surveys, and these surveys were going to doctors. So there was a survey survey that was administered to about 10,000 doctors, and approximately half of them were randomly selected to receive a letter before the survey. So the idea is you send out a letter, you say hi, we're sending you this really important survey. When you get it, please don't throw it away. Please fill it out and return it. The other half of the doctors did not receive a letter introducing the survey, they just received the survey. Researchers wanted to see then if the doctors who received the letter before the survey would respond to the survey at a different rate than the doctors who did not receive that opening letter. So here we have two categorical variables that we're interested in. The first one is the grouping variable. The grouping variable separated the doctors into two groups. The group that received the letter and the group that did not. Then the variable that we're interested in is did they return the survey or not. So our response variable has two categories, returned the survey or did not return the survey? And we're gonna consider returned the survey to be our definition of success. So that will be the proportion that we will be working with. So our parameters here are a piece of one. So imagine we have a population of all doctors who receive a letter like this before receiving a survey. Piece of one then would be the proportion of those doctors in that population who will return the survey. Peace of two will also be the proportion of doctors in a population who returned the survey, but the population, uh, in this case would be the doctors who do not receive an opening letter. Now in looking at our data, Here is our contingency table. So you can see that we have um our two groups, whether they received a letter or not, and those are our role variable. And so we have yes and no for our groups. We had about the same number in each one of the groups. The received letter group was slightly smaller. But roughly about the same. Then we're looking at the return letter variable. So that is our interest and in particular, since there's just two possibilities, yes they did, or no they didn't return the survey, then we have either our yes or no and so we're primarily interested in. These values right there and then we of course have our total right here. Now, if you look at the data, we obviously have a very large number of successes and failures in each one of the groups in the data table. So we don't have to worry about our condition when we go to calculate our confidence interval. So the first thing that we'll do is calculate our sample statistics. The first one is our Phat one, that will be the 2570 divided by the 5018. And then our Phat 2 will be the 25, 2645 divided by the 5029. Now we'll need to calculate the standard error for the difference in our two sample proportions. And so to do this, I have uh presented the Phat 1 and 1 minus Phat1 as fractions of the values that are in the contingency table. So this is the proportion of successes. And this is the proportion of failures. Same thing with the second group. This is the proportion of successes, and this is the proportion of failures. When we calculate this out, we end up with a value that's just under 0.01. So I have um made the number or um. Went ahead and rounded to 6 decimal places since I'm using it as a part of an overall calculation of 0.009968. Our confidence interval for P1 minus P2 then takes the difference in our sample proportions. So our sample proportions are listed as these numbers right here. We'll add and subtract our Z alpha over 2 for 95% confidence, that's 1.96. And then we will multiply that 1.96 times our standard error from the previous slide. So what we end up with is a value that ranges from minus um negative, yeah, 0.0333. To 0.0057. So if I think about the difference in these two population proportions as given by this confidence interval. I can really think about that first population proportion, that piece of one, as the in the population of all doctors who would receive the letter, the proportion who returned the survey. That would be between 0.0333 lower since it's negative, 2.0057 higher since it's positive, than the corresponding proportion in the other population, so that's the population of all doctors who did not receive the letter. So when we're thinking about this confidence interval for this difference, we can see that well the difference includes 0, right? So when we're thinking about comparison between P1 and P2, that confidence interval really tells us that. Well, um, we probably don't have a difference here between P1 and P2. The 0 is a reasonable value for that difference, um, and so at least for these two populations, there doesn't seem to be any great benefit. To sending out a pre-survey letter to try to encourage doctors' offices to send in the survey and so probably not worth the time and the effort and the expense to do. So definitely a result that they probably weren't expecting, but a result that's good for them to know so that they don't waste time, effort, and money.
