SPEAKER 0
So far in our study of two categorical variables, we have focused on comparing proportions. First, we've looked at the difference between two proportions. And then we studied the odds ratio. The inference that we conducted in both cases was based on the confidence interval. In this segment, we're going to start talking about hypothesis tests that are related to categorical variables. First, we'll talk about the structure of the variables and the data. And then we'll introduce the test and show an example. So we have our two categorical variables, and in general, they can have any number of categories. We'll call that for variable 1, I, and for variable 2 J. Our data is collected in particular, as a random sample from a single population. Our random sample has size little N. And once we obtain our data on these two categorical variables, we will cross classify them according to the categories, and then form them into a contingency table. Here's an example of what a contingency table might look like. We have in this example, 3 categories for variable 1 and 4 categories for variable 2. The cell values, the number of observations belonging to each combination of the categories from variable 1 and variable 2 are denoted in the table as Y I J. So you can see it ranges from Y11 all the way up to Y sub 34. Are row totals, so the total number of observations belonging to each one of the categories of variable one. Those are denoted as capital Y. Uh, I do. And likewise with the column totals, those are denoted as capital Y.J. Then you can see that we have our total number of observations in our table listed as our sample size N. To start with our hypothesis test, we need to make a few definitions of our population proportions. To start, P I J will be the proportion in the population that belongs to both categories I of variable 1 and Category J of variable 2. Pi will be the proportion of the of the members of the population that belong to the category. And likewise, PJ will be the proportion of the population that belongs to the Ji category in variable 2. Our null hypothesis is that the two variables are independent in the population. When we talk about independence, you can think about the idea as if you know information about one of the variables, that doesn't give you any information about the other variable. Mathematically, we write that as that piece of IJ, so that population proportion of being both in category I and Category J. is equal to the product of the individual proportions of being in category I by itself and Category J by itself. So if the two variables are independent in the population, this has to be the characteristic for all I and J. The alternative hypothesis is that these two variables are not independent in the population. Mathematically, we would write that that at least one of the piece of IJ's is not equal to the product of the individual proportions. And so that has to hold for at least one. So we don't say it holds for all of them or any combination of them. We just need at least one, and that's all the alternative hypothesis. The first thing that we do in looking at our model is to think about what would we expect to get in each one of the cells in the table if the null hypothesis were really true. So if there was really independence, how many observations would we expect to see? The number of observations that we expect to see if we have a sample of size N is equal to N times the population proportion of that cell. So that is N times PIJ. However, the null hypothesis says that P I J is equal to the product of the individual proportions, Pi and PJ. Now these are population proportions, and they are unknown. But we can estimate them with our data. And so to estimate the population proportion for the I category of variable one, we will simply take the row total for that category and divide by the total number of observations. So that would be Y sub i. divided by N. And we'll do the same thing for variable 2. We'll take the column total for that category and divide by the total number of observations, which is N. Since we're having to estimate our proportions, we will get an estimated expected value. So we'll go ahead and put in our sample proportions from our data into our expected value formula. Now I like to put a hat over the whole thing just to show you that yes, this is an estimate. Um, not everybody does, so you may see it in different resources in different ways. But this expected value, this estimated expected value is N times the two sample proportions multiplied together. And then those sample proportions, we have their formulas for them. And as you can see, one of the Ns cancels in the denominator with the N in the numerator. And so we end up with Y I Y.J over N. And if you look to see what those values actually are, They are the row total. For the observation, the column total for the observation, and the total for the table. And so we're expected. Uh, values are estimated using this formula. Then to see about our test statistic, we will compare these estimated expected values to the data that we observe in our contingency table. When we think about these expected values, they were estimated, assuming that the null hypothesis was true. And so if the null hypothesis is true, what we're expecting to see is a very small difference between the observed values and our estimated expected values. The larger the differences that we see. The more we're thinking, oh, I don't know that that null hypothesis is really the correct model for my categorical variables. Now when we think about comparing these values of the observed and the expected, we really don't care whether the values are negative or positive, we just care about how far apart they are. And in statistics, many times when that is the case, we will take whatever difference we've calculated and square it. Also, we have divided by the estimated expected value for each one of these terms. This is a way of weighting the differences that we see by how many observations we were really expecting. This allows us to make things a little bit more on par with each other in terms of the differences. So when you think about, let's say our expected value for a certain cell is 100 and we end up with 98. So that's a difference of 2. Out of 100 We would want that to have a different weight in our test statistic than if we had a cell where we were expecting 10, and we only got 8. So we are again still too off, but we're 2 off out of 10, not 2 off out of 100, and so that 2 out of 10 should have a higher weight in our test statistic. And so dividing by the expected value allows us to do that. Once we have our test statistic, we do need to double check that the estimated expected values are all greater than are equal to 5. If that's true, then this x2 test statistic follows its distribution is well approximated by the chi square distribution. And so that's why many times this X2 statistic is called the chi square test statistic. The distribution for this chi square has degrees of freedom, and so the degrees of freedom are I minus 1 times J-1. And so since large values of X2d are providing us with evidence against the null hypothesis of independence, we will be looking for a right tail in our chi square distribution. And so if we look at our chi square distribution, maybe it looks something like that, and here's our test statistic. And so our P value will be the right tail. While we can have any size of categories, we generally don't have very large ones, and so the degrees of freedom for this test statistic is usually fairly small. So the chi square distribution is still pretty right skewed in most applications for the test of independence. OK, so as promised, here's an example. The data comes from a long time ago, um, from the 1970s, and uh a sample of 5000 students from a population, uh, was taken. And they were looking in part at the relationship between the smoking habits of the students, uh, and the smoking habits of their parents. Now, as you'll see as we look at the data, um, yes, this is from the 1970s, and yes, there is a much larger proportion of uh smoking being reported in the data than there would be now, uh, if we asked. Our variable one is the parent smoking status. And so when students were asked about the smoking status of their parents, they were asked to uh attribute it either to neither one of their parents smokes, one parent smokes or both parents smoke. A variable to then is the student smoking status. That was either a non-smoker or smoker. Here are the data. As I mentioned, there's over 5000 observations. And you can see that the smallest cell is still 188. So we have a good amount of data for our 6 possible cells in our table. To get a general idea of what our values in the um contingency table look like, I've included a mosaic plot in the lecture notes. And I decided to make the mosaic plot look at the categories of parent smoking status, and what the distribution of student smoking within those categories would be. So you can see overall, um, more students than not do not smoke. However, if you look at the neither parent smoking group and compare that to the one parent and both parent, you'll see that the proportion of students who smoke increases in each case. So it's smaller for neither, a little bit larger for one, and a little bit larger again for both. All right, so for our test of independence, our null hypothesis is that the smoking status of students and their parents are independent in this population. The alternative is that they are not independent in this population. Now even though mathematically we can write out what independence and dependence or not independence means, most people don't do that. Most people use um the first statement of the null and alternative hypotheses when they're writing up a test like this. Here's the observed data again, and I show you the observed data to show you the process for getting the expected, the estimated expected values. So you remember the formula row total times column total divided by table total. And so if we wanted to look at the expected value, for example, of our cell neither smokes non-smoker, that would be an observational value of 1,168, but our expected value, we would get 1,356. That is the row total. Times 4371, that is the column total, and then we would be dividing by 5375. That is the table total. We would continue that process throughout the other 5 cells in the table, and we would end up with. These values. So these are all the expected values if the null hypothesis is true. And now our goal is to be able to compare these observed values. To what we would expect under the null hypothesis. So for our test statistic X2, we will start putting together that calculation. We will have the observed values, and then we'll subtract off those expected values. Remember those are estimates, and then we'll divide by uh the estimated expected value. The numerator, that difference we square it. We'll add all of these up and then we'll um get our total. Our total turns out to be 37.5663. Now in thinking about the p value, the first thing we want to double check is that all of the expected values, their estimates are all greater than 5. So if we go back to our expected values table, we notice that that is true. The smallest one is 253.288. So we're good there. So we will be using the chi square distribution to approximate the distribution of this X2 statistic. And so I uh is 3 and J is 2, so I minus 1 times J minus 1 will be 2 times 1 or 2. And so we'll have 2 degrees of freedom for this chi square distribution. Now, a 2 degree of freedom Keisper distribution, we expect its value to be 2. Uh, we got 37 and some change. And so when we look at the P value, the 37.5663 will be very, very, very far into the right tail of this chi square distribution. When the p-value gets so small that it's less than 0.0001, we'll just put down it's less than 0.0001. So our conclusion then is that we have extremely strong evidence, right? So we have a very, very small p-value, so that is giving us a lot of evidence against the null hypothesis. And in favor of the alternative. The alternative is that the smoking status of the students is not independent from the smoking status of the parents. And when we think about the data that we saw. In the mosaic plot. That makes sense. And so now this test is telling us that on, while we see this in our sample, um, these values are large enough um for us to infer that about the population as well.
