SPEAKER 0
Before we cover the chi square tests that are related to two categorical variables, in this segment, we will spend some time talking about the sampling models that produce the observations in a contingency table. We'll start with some background information. And then we will talk about the different data collection procedures that produce our contingency table. The first one is our data comes to us from one sample from one population. And the second one is that our data comes to us from multiple samples from multiple populations. So in terms of our background information, there's a couple of different distributions that are related to categorical variables. The first one is called a binomial distribution, and then the second one is a multinomial distribution. For a binomial distribution, we think about this distribution as corresponding to the information in a categorical variable with two categories. We usually refer to those categories as success and failure. The value P is then the proportion or the probability of successes in the population. And the value Y is then the number of successes that we would have in an independent observations from our population. This value Y is said to then have a binomial distribution. The mean of the binomial distribution is the number of independent observations and times the probability of success. That makes sense. If you think maybe of an example where we would have the probability of success as being 0.25. And we have 100 observations. We would expect to see 25 successes out of those 100 observations. We also know how much the number of successes will vary. And that is the variance. That formula is N times P 1 minus P. This contrasts with a multinomial distribution. A multinomial distribution is applied to a categorical variable with more than 2 categories. Since we have more than 2 categories, we need to keep track of the proportion of observations in the population that belong to each one of the categories. We denote that with still a P, but then we have a subscript. So, for example, if we had 4 categories, we would have P1, P2, P3, and P4. Then if we're looking at an independent observations from a population. The values that we would keep track of, the Y sub I, are the number of observations in that corresponding I category. And so again, if we have 4 categories, we would have Y1, Y2, Y3, and Y4. These values of the wise are said to have a multinomial distribution. The parameters of the multinomial distribution are still the number of observations and and the proportions or probabilities in the population, the piece. For each one of our Y's, we can calculate both its mean and its variants, using a formula in a very similar way to the binomial distribution formula for its mean invariants. And so we would get a mean for each one of these Y values, and it would be equal to the sample size, the number of observations, and times the proportion of successes in that category. Then finally, it's important to recognize that in a multinomial distribution. These values of the Y, so the Y1, Y2, etc. they are not independent from each other. And so if you think about having a certain number of observations, let's say N observations. If one of the categories would change and have more observations, then necessarily on average, the other categories are going to have to have less observations, because the total number of observations is still equal to n. We can actually calculate for a multinomial distribution, the correlation between the two values, so the correlation between a Yi and a Y L. The most important thing to notice here is that the correlation is negative. And so when we're thinking about the relationship between each one of these uh values in our multinomial distribution, we can remember that if one of them increases, the others on average are going to decrease. OK, with these two distributions, we will now discuss the different data collection procedures that arise from having two categorical variables. In the first one we're really thinking about our data as coming from one population, so we have a random sample of size N from that population, and we have collected two variables. The variables are categorical. Variable 1 has capital I categories, and variable 2 has capital J categories. Based on the observations for those two categorical variables, we'll cross classify them, and we will then form them into a contingency table. So here is an example contingency table. You can see that our variable 1 has I equals 3 categories, our variable 2 has J equals 4 categories. What we would like to be able to do then is to look at the observations in the contingency table. And understand their distribution. Now the main thing from this contingency table is that the only value that is fixed prior to collecting our data is the sample size N. What we'll think about here is we have these two separate categorical variables, but let's think about combining them into a new categorical variable. And this new categorical variable then will have I times J categories. Now I times J has to be bigger than 2. And so when we look at the number of observations in the contingency table, that will be our capital Y I J. And so those will be the number of observations in the ice category of variable 1 and in the J category of variable 2. And those are coming from our independent observations from our random sample from our population. And so we have I times J of these capital Y values. And so those that set of I times J values, those Y sub IJs, they have a uh multinomial distribution. The parameters are N for the N observations, and then the probabilities we call piece of IJ. That's the set of I times J proportions or probabilities of the observations in our categories um I invariable 1 and J in variable 2. And so if we think about using this particular sampling model for the values in our contingency table, we can see that we would expect each one of those values, the Ys of IJs, to be. equal to the sample size, the number of independent observations, and times the probability of being in that particular combination of our two categories in that IJ category combination. Now this contrasts with. Having a different type of data collection procedure. This type of data collection procedure is that we have stratified samples from eye populations so that we have a sample from each one of these populations, or we might have an experiment and we might have eye treatment groups and so you can see the variable one then corresponds to. The populations that we have. The variable too then corresponds to our category of interest that we're collecting from each one of these samples. And we're gonna split this up into two possibilities. One is that J, the number of categories for that variable is equal to 2, and the other one is that J is greater than 2. When we cross classify our observations of our two categories and put them into a contingency table, we will get something like this. This is an example contingency table when J is equal to 2. And so you can see when J is equal to 2, our variable 2 just has the two categories we generally call them success and failure. And then our variable 1 has the the groups corresponding to the categories, and here we we show three groups. The main thing that you'll notice in this contingency table is that the number of observations in each one of the rows is fixed. And so we've gone out and taken samples of a certain size from each one of our populations. So we can think about those observations, the ends of eyes, as being independent observations, and they're uh from capital I, independent samples. And so within a sample, the observations are independent. And across the samples, the observations are independent. And we're going to be focusing on the number of successes in sample I. That will be our capital Y sub I1. So if we look at the contingency table, we will be focused on. These values right there. So our Y 11, Y sub 21, Y sub 31, etc. Now, as it turns out, we have for each one of our uh values, our Y sub I uh ones, we have a binomial distribution for that Y. And it will have parameters and some I for the number of observations, and then it will have the proportion or probability of success in the population I equal to PI1. And so if we think about how many successes would we expect to see in each one of our samples, that would be the expected value of our Y sub I one, and that would be equal to the number of observations times the probability of success. And this would be the expected value for all of the I groups. And if we look at these I binomial values, they are independent from each other, since the independent uh samples are what produced those. Now, in looking at this example, We ended up with a binomial distribution because our category, our variable of interest had two categories. We might also have a situation where our variable of interest would have more than 2 categories. So here's an example with a 3 by 4 contingency table. And so you can see our variable of interest, variable 2 has 4 categories, and our variable 1, our grouping variable, has 3 categories. And the important thing in looking at this contingency table is that these values, the row totals, are fixed. And so we took a sample of size and sub I from each one of the eye populations. So just like with the previous case, we have NI independent observations from capital I independent samples. But since there are now more than 2 categories, we need to keep track of all of the observations in our contingency table. So if we look. At our contingency table, we need to. Be paying attention to. The values across each one of the rows. And so we'll call those Y I J. But we'll think about those just a little bit differently. Those are the number of observations in category J of variable 2. In sample I. And so if I think about going across the row, so for each I, that set of capital J values has a multinomial distribution, and its parameters are the end of I observations. And then the proportions. Piece of I1, piece of I 2, etc. up to piece of I J. Those are the set of proportions or probabilities for being in category J, so those will go from 1 through capital J. From variable to. Then for population I. And if we think about, well, how many observations would we expect? In each one of our cells, well, we would think about this as looking at within each row, and we would look at the number of observations in that row, so and I, and then times the probability of being in that category within that row. So that would be our P sub IJ. And so this would be our expected value for all values of I and J. Now, if I look at the I sets of multinomial values, those sets are independent from each other. But of course within a set, those y values are not independent. Because they are values in a multinomial distribution. And so as we learned before, those values will be related to each other, specifically, if one increases on average the others will decrease. And so as we move forward with the chi square tests that are related to two categorical variables, you'll see these two types of sampling models in play as we develop those tests.
