SPEAKER 0
Our second type of hypothesis test that goes with two categorical variables is called the test for equality for multinomial distributions. We'll first start by reviewing and going over the variables in the data uh that will lead to this model, and then we will introduce the test and go through an example. Our two categorical variables can really have any number of categories. So for variable 1, we'll call that capital I categories, and for variable 2, we'll call that capital J categories. The data collection procedure is that we have either stratified samples from capital I populations. Or we have an experiment with capital I treatment groups. And so you can see that the information here is connected to variable one. And so variable one is going to provide us with the information about which group the observation was in. Variable to then really becomes the variable that we're interested in. And so we'll take and cross classify our observations according to the two categories, and then we'll form that into a contingency table. Now the main difference between this contingency table and the one we saw in the previous segment. Are the row totals. Since we have either stratified samples from, in this case, 3 populations, or we have 3 treatment groups in an experiment. Those samples have a fixed size before the data are collected. And so we know before we receive the data, what our row totals will be. And so because of that, we have denoted those. With ends. The rest of the contingency table looks very much the same as in the previous segment. For our test, uh, for equality of the multinomial distributions, we will start by defining our population proportion. Piece of IJ is going to be the population proportion of category I, sorry, category, um, a variable 2. When you're in category I of variable one. Category I of variable one is either a particular uh sample or a from a population or a particular treatment group. Our null hypothesis is then that the distribution of variable 2 is exactly the same for all categories of variable 1. So no matter which population you belong to or which treatment group you belong to, the distribution of variable 2 is the same. So if we think of saying that mathematically, we can say that the set of proportions. So the probability of being in the first category for a variable 2, the second category for variable 2, etc. um, that set of values is the same no matter which category for variable one you belong to. So no matter the value for I. The alternative hypothesis is that um the distribution for variable 2 is different for at least one of those categories of variable 1. So at least for one eye, we would get a different set of values for that piece of I1, piece of by 2, etc. So if the null hypothesis is true, That says that piece of IJ. If you have the same J. It's always the same value. So P sub 11 would be the same as P sub 21 would be the same as P sub 31, etc. So as long as the J is the same. The eye can be different, and we would end up with the same value. We're gonna call that common value then PJ. And so if the null hypothesis is true, P I J is equal to PJ. For all values of I. Now when we think about our data, we have a fixed number of observations in our category I. Of variable one. And so if we think about the expected value for each one of the cells in the contingency table. We would have that it would be equal to the size of the row. Then times the probability of being in that category 4 variable 2. So that would give us NI times PJ. Now, piece of.j is an unknown population proportion. So we're going to have to estimate that with our sample data. And so we would do something very similar to our last segment. We would say, OK, well, if I'd like to know and estimate the proportion of the population that belongs to Category J, I will take its column total, and I'll divide by the number of observations n. So when I substitute in that value in the expected value formula and get an estimate of that expected value. I end up with the number of observations in the I throw. Times YJ divided by N. Oh, look at that. That is. The row total times the column total divided by the table total. So even though. When we defined the problem. We have a different structure for our data. And so we have a different statement for our null and alternative hypotheses. And we have a different derivation of our estimated expected value, we end up with the same calculation. Once we've calculated these expected uh these expected values and estimated those with our data, then the test statistic follows the same logic. We'll compare these estimated expected values to the observed values. We don't really care if it's a positive difference or a negative difference. We just care how much the difference is, so we'll square it. And we want to wait by the expected value. So that we can tell the difference in our test statistic between having uh expected value of 100 and getting 98 for a difference of 2 or having an expected value of 10 and getting uh an observed value of 8, that is also a difference of 2, but that 2 out of 10 is should be a much larger value in the test statistic than the 2 out of 100. So we'll calculate this value X2. And just like before, even though uh the derivation is different, the um. Distribution for X2 is well approximated by the chi square distribution, and it has the same degrees of freedom. I minus 1 times J minus 1. Again, our P value is going to be looking at large values of X2. Those are the ones that provide our evidence against the null hypothesis. So if we look at our chi square distribution, it is right skewed. We might have our test statistic out here, and so our P value will be the right tail. OK, so let's look at an example. We have some data from a company called Finger Lakes Homes. And they manufacture 3 models of prefabricated homes. There's a 2-story colonial, a log cabin, and what's called an A frame. To help in product line planning, management would like to study the customer satisfaction with these three home styles. So they go ahead and take a sample of 120 owners of each one of the three styles. So our variable one are those three styles, so that will show us the population um of the different customers based on their home style. So I have called them Colonial Cabin and A-frame. The variable too Is there satisfaction. And so one of the questions that was asked is, would they repurchase the same style. The options were, yes, no, or maybe. Now sometimes with options like this, you might not be able to do this analysis, or want to do this analysis um on using all three categories. You might have so few maybes that you'll want to either drop that or combine it with the no. But in this case, we actually had enough data um to include the maybe. And so you can see out of our 120 that uh customers in the sample for Colonial, 90 said yes, they would repurchase, uh 17 said no, they would not, and 13 said maybe. And so you can see for each one of those 120 in our three groups, we have the distribution of their repurchase question. To get an idea of what our data is looking like, we can look at the mosaic plot. And since the groups are very clearly defined in this problem, I have taken those as the groups and then looked at the distribution of the would you repurchase the same style question as the columns here in our mosaic plot. So, um, you can see that, yeah, in general, many, many of the customers are satisfied and would repurchase the same style. We do see some differences, though, in the yes. Um, we also see some differences in the no, so the height of the green is a little bit different, particularly for the last style, the A frame. And then we can see the maybe category um is a little bit different, especially for the A frame. There weren't very many people. It seems like either they liked it or they didn't, and there wasn't very many people that didn't have an opinion, um, and that was a little bit different than for the cabin style and also the colonial style. So if we're looking at the null hypothesis, that would be that the distribution of this repurchase variable is the same for all of the home style customer populations. So we have the population of customers for the colonial, for the cabin, and for the A frame. And so the distribution of the repurchase variable would be the same for all three. The alternative hypothesis is that at least one of those homestyle customer populations has a different distribution for the repurchase variable. So at least one, it could be, it could be all three are different, it could be um just one is different, it could be 2 are different, um, but at least one of them is not the same as the others. Now mathematically, we can write that as that, um, for the null hypothesis, P I J is equal to PJ. And so the probability of being in the cell for category I uh is the same as the probability of being in the column. Uh, probability of being in that column. The alternative hypothesis is that it's not, that at least one of them is different. So here's our observed data, and again I'm showing this to you so that we can talk about the expected values. So we can estimate our expected values for each one of the cells by taking the row total. Times the column total. And then dividing by the grand total. And so, for example. The expected value for the colonial yes cell is 120 times 254 divided by 360. These are the expected values. So estimating um with our sample data gives us an expected value for the yes repurchase of all 84.67. They are all the same for all three groups because all three groups have the same sample size. If they didn't have the same sample size, they would not be the same value. Same thing for no, they're all 22.67, and all of the maybes are 12.67. You'll notice that the expected value estimate for all of the maybes is well above 5. So we will take these values and go ahead and calculate our test statistic. We will have 9 values that we're calculating that can contribute to the test statistic value. So for example, that first cell we talked about had an observed value of 990, um, and an expected value of 84.67. Um, once we continue this process of calculating the test statistic, we end up with the value 12.006. Now, as we saw from the expected values, all of those estimates are greater than or equal to 5. So we can go ahead and use the chi square distribution to approximate the distribution of X2. And when we're looking at the distribution of X2 here, we would have a chi square distribution and we would have i minus 1, which is 2 times J minus 1, which is also 2, so that'd be 2 times 2 equals 4 degrees of freedom. Now 12.006 is out into the right tail of this chi square distribution with 4 degrees of freedom, but it is not hugely in the right tail, and this should be an equals. I'll go back and fix that, but that should be an equal sign. So our P value is 0.0173. So this is giving us kind of moderately strong evidence that the distribution of the repurchase variable is different for at least one of the homestyle's um populations. And so when you think about what this is telling us and you look back at the data, it would definitely be interesting um to look at different questions about those three populations, but I find it fascinating that very much the A frame folks um had an opinion one way or another about whether they would repurchase. So I think talking to the people that would not in that group might be helpful in terms of better improving. Um, that product planning that they're wanting to do. Now, we have come to the, towards the end of this segment. This segment and the previous one, we were talking about chi square tests. So in the previous one, we had the test of independence. In this one we have the test for the equality of um the multinomial distributions. Now you'll notice there's a lot in common with these two tests. Because each of the tests comes from different types of data. The null and alternative hypotheses are different. And when null and alternative hypotheses are different, then your conclusions are also going to be. Different, right? They're gonna have a different structure. So in the test of independence, our null hypothesis was independence. In the test for equality, our null hypothesis was, all of these population proportions are the same. Because of then, how we collected the data, the way that we derived the two estimated expected values, the one for the test of independence and the one for the test for equality. Those were different. But while the derivation was different, we ended up in the same place. We ended up with the same formula for the calculation of the expected uh the estimated expected values. This also meant that we ended up with the same test statistic. And the same P value. But as I mentioned, because the data were different in the test of independence, we had a single population. That we were taking a sample from and cross classifying two categorical variables and in the test for equality we had multiple populations we were sampling from or had multiple treatment groups um and so that makes the difference in what we would conclude about the relationships in the two categorical variables that we have in our population.
