SPEAKER 0
In our previous segment, we looked at comparing two proportions by taking the difference. In this segment, we will look at a different way of comparing two proportions, and that's by using the odds ratio. We'll first introduce the idea of a population odds ratio, and then we'll talk about how you estimate that with data. Then finally we'll do inference for the population odds ratio by looking at a confidence interval. So when we think about our variables, we have our grouping variable, so we have our um i equals 2 groups, and then we have our response variable. And in this case we're going to stick with J equals 2 categories. So we can think about the categories as being success and failure. So for our population proportions then, we'll have piece of one, which we will refer to as the proportion of success in population one. And we'll have peace of 2, the proportion of success in our population 2. Now when we were looking at the difference in two proportions, that can be a helpful value to consider, but one of the downsides of looking at the difference in the two proportions is that it ignores the relative size of those two proportions. So to Get you an idea of what I'm talking about here. I have several different values for P1 and P2. Each set of P1 and P2 values have a difference of 0.009. However, if you look at the ratio. So that you can look at the relative size of those two proportions, you'll see that the relative size changes greatly depending on, of course, the size of P1 and P2. And so for the smallest example, the ratio of P1 to P2 is 10. So P1 is 10 times as large as P2. Now this difference, this ratio does decrease as our P1 and P2 values increase, but you can see that that relative size does not stay the same. They have the same difference, but their relative size is different. To get at this idea of a relative size, we're going to introduce the idea first of population odds. The odds is the ratio of the proportion of success to the proportion of failure in a population. And so the odds for the ice population are piece of over 1 minus piece of I. Now odds, interestingly enough, have um an interpretation based around the value of one. So if the odds are equal to one, then that means that the numerator and the denominator are the same. So since one is the proportion of successes and the other is the proportion of failures, um, that means if the odds is one and the numerator and the denominator are the same, they both have to be 0.5. Likewise, if the odd is greater than 1, then that means the numerator is bigger than the denominator, and so that would imply that the probability or the proportion of successes is greater than 0.5. And then finally, if the odds is less than 1, that means that the uh numerator is smaller than the denominator. And so that means that the um proportion of successes has to be less than 0.5. So this looks at the odds of only one population. And so what we would like to do. we would like to take the ratio. Of the odds for two populations. This is called a population odds ratio. So we'll have the odds for population one. And then we will divide that by the odds for population 2. So as you can see, um, the, uh, odds for population 1 is our P1 divided by 1 minus P1, and same thing for population 2, it's P2 divided by 1 minus P2. This is usually abbreviated with the Greek letter 5. That is not um. The notation is not universal, um, but that's what the notation that I'm going to use. So if our odds ratio of 5 is equal to 1, that means that the odds of success is equal for the two groups. So equal odds implies equal probabilities, and so that means that P1 and P2 are the same. If our population odds ratio is greater than 1, then that tells me the odds of success is larger for population 1 than for population 2. And so if the odds of success is larger for 1 than the other, the probability or the proportion of successes is larger for one than the other. So that will tell me P1 is greater than P2. Likewise, if the um Uh, if, um. A phi is less than 1, then the odds of success will be smaller for population 1 than for population 2. And so that will also imply that P1 is less than P2. So it's important to recognize that Phi does not indicate actual values for P1 and P2. Um, we know based on its value we can compare P1 and P2 so we can look at their relative relationship, but we would not get values for P1 and P2 from the population odds ratio or for any odds ratio. So that's what we have at the population level. What would we have if we wanted to estimate? Our population odds ratio with data. So here is a look at what the contingency table in this type of analysis would resemble. We would have our two groups as our rows. The number in those two groups would be fixed prior to data collection. And then we would have our number of successes and failures in each one of those two groups, and then we would have our column total. So the total number of overall successes and the total number of overall failures. Now, we would like to then estimate our population proportions as our sample proportions. And so we will do that. And so we will get our PAT one. That will just be the observed proportion of successes in sample one. So that would be the number of successes in sample one divided by the total in sample one. So that would be Y11 divided by end of 1. Likewise, if we wanted the observed proportion of failures in sample one, we would go ahead and take Y12 as the number of failures in sample 1, and divide by the total number of observations in sample one, which would be N1. We would do the analogous thing for our sample too. Now, if you think about estimating the population odds ratio, it would make sense then to estimate it using those sample proportions. And so we would get 5 hands. And that would be equal to our estimated odds for population for our sample 1 and our estimated odds for our sample 2. And since each one of these values. Has a common. Denominator You can see those will cancel. And so our sample odds ratio is equal to Y11 divided by Y12. And then divide by Y2 1 divided by Y22. Now, when we take our data, of course, this uh value for Phi hat is going to uh vary from sample to sample. So we would like to estimate our population odds ratio, and we'll go ahead and do that with a confidence interval. Now, in terms of how the confidence interval for our population odds ratio works, it is actually better on a theoretical basis to first calculate the confidence interval for the natural log. Of the population odds ratio. And then once we have that, then we will undo the natural log by applying the exponential function to both endpoints. So we know we're going to use our uh phi hat to estimate our population odds ratio. We need to know what the standard error of that value is. And as it turns out, getting the standard error of the natural log of y hat is much easier. And so as you can see, um it is from this formula here. And so when we look at the confidence interval then, we will have the natural log of I hat. Plus or minus Z alpha over 2. Times the standard error. Of the natural log of Iha. So Z alpha over 2 is that upper. Um, alpha 2 percentile. It could also be written as the. 1 minus alpha over 2, if you just uh refer to it as the 1 minus alpha 2 percentile. Once we obtain the confidence interval for the natural log of Phi, then we'll go ahead and take the exponential function of both endpoints. OK, so here is an example of getting the confidence interval for the population odds ratio. So, in medicine, there has been a debate for a long time about how to treat men who are suffering from prostate cancer, and in particular whether surgery can prolong life. So in 2003, there was a study published in the New England Journal of Medicine. In this study, men who were diagnosed with prostate cancer were randomly assigned to either undergo surgery or not. Now when you're thinking about this type of study, um, I think it's pretty clear that the men who were eligible for this study had a particular type of um or particular diagnosis with their prostate cancer, um, and so they wouldn't either um put someone in a study that had very advanced prostate cancer and they probably wouldn't put someone in the study that um had not very advanced at all, right? Um, and so when we're looking at um the groups, then they randomly assign them to either have surgery or not. The response variable is whether or not the um the men died from prostate cancer so that they could um track back their um uh cause of death and it would be due to the prostate cancer. So our variables. We have two populations. We have the population that has surgery and the population that doesn't. And in this particular case, we have um an experiment that they did. So we've got these two groups and the response variable is did they die from prostate cancer? Yes or no. And so here is the data that we have. Now you can see overall, um, the proportion of uh the participants who died from prostate cancer is very low, uh 47/695. But you do see that there is a difference. Um, the surgery group had 16 out of 347 died from prostate cancer, and the no surgery group had 31. So almost double. So in calculating our proportions of successes and failures estimated from the data. We would go ahead and follow the formulas previously. So our proportion of successes for our surgery group would be 16 out of the 347. The proportion of failures would be the 331 out of 347. The proportion of successes for the non-surgery group would be 31 out of 348, and then the proportion of failures would be 317 out of 348. As you can see, we have our estimated. Um, our sample odds ratio, and so in putting these proportions together. Those denominators will cancel out. And so we end up with 0.4943. We'll go ahead and calculate the standard error for the natural log of Phihat. To do that, we'll need the sample size um of each one of the groups times the um sample proportion. And so I went ahead and calculated or showed those things up top, um, so that is actually just the values in the cells. So we have 1631, 3:31, and 317. So the standard error for the natural log of phi hat is 0.3177. Now we'll put together our confidence interval. If we do 95%, we will then have a Z uh alpha over 2 of 1.96. We'll take the natural log if I had, so the natural log of 0.4943. And then we will plug in that standard error formula as well. When we do that, we get values of negative 1.3273 and 0.0819. Now that would be the natural log of 5 hats confidence interval. That is not what we want. I don't want to try to interpret the natural log of a population odds ratio. That is not something I would like to do. So I'm going to go ahead and apply the exponential function to both endpoints to get the 95% confidence interval for phi. And that will turn out to be 0.26512.9214. So I can go ahead and interpret that confidence interval. We are 95% confident that the population odds of dying from prostate cancer in the population of patients who have surgery. Is between 0.2651 and 0.9214 times. The population odds of dying from prostate cancer in the population of patients who do not have surgery. So your odds of dying from prostate cancer is lower. Uh, if you have surgery versus if you do not. Now, one thing to keep in mind is that your odds of dying from prostate cancer are still overall low. Um, so remember it's not looking at um absolute actual values, it's looking at relative values. At this point, you have to decide what to do, either surgery or not, um, and your odds of dying from prostate cancer, um, if you elect for surgery is lower. Now in terms of the relative values, both of these end points are less than one. And so this tells us that the proportion of patients in the population. Um, that would have surgery and die from prostate cancer is less than the proportion of patients in the population who do not have surgery and die from prostate cancer. So by having this value for uh the confidence interval for the population odds ratio, this does give us a way of comparing the relative values of the pro the proportions as well as the odds.
