SPEAKER 0
Our last segment in working with two categorical variables is going to look at paired data. The test for paired data, when the variables are categorical, has a special name. It's called McNamara's test. So we'll begin by looking at the variables and the data. And then we'll introduce the test. And then we'll follow up also with a confidence interval. So in the usual presentation of McNamara's test. The two variables have only 2 categories. So our variable 1 has 2 categories and our variable 2 has 2 categories. It is possible to do something similar to McNamara's test if we have more categories, but honestly, it's not really done very often, so we'll just stick with the typical presentation of McNamara's test. The two variables. Are similar. They have the same categories. We usually think of these as success, failure, yes, no, correct and correct type categories. And we have that the variables are matched or related in some way. Usually it's they were taken from the same set of people over a certain amount of time, OK, or maybe the actual content has something that relates those two variables together. So if we look at the structure of a data table that falls into this situation, we would have and rows in our sample. And we would have observations from two categorical variables. And you can see the variables have the exact same set of categories. In this case, uh, it's depicted as having success failure. Based on those two variables, then we'll form a contingency table. By cross classifying the observations as we have been doing. So you'll see that we have um variables 1 and 2 with their success and failure. And we have our 4 observations in the cells. The example that we will be looking at as a part of this segment is actually one from my research in statistics education. We were wanting to um gather some data about how well students understand histograms. And so in particular, can students identify what the horizontal and vertical axis of the histograms are supposed to represent? Each one of the students answered both of these questions about the same histogram. So obviously when you think about answering these questions, what you would answer on the first question would probably. Impact, what you would answer on the second question. So they would be in some way related to each other. Each question then was scored as correct or incorrect. 589 of our students in this introductory statistics course answered the two questions. And their scored responses as either correct or incorrect, are summarized in this contingency table. So we can see a very large number of the students, um, got both of the questions correct. So 469 out of 589. But that also means that we had um a 120 students who answered at least one of them incorrectly. My goal here then is to compare the proportion of successes for each one of the variables. So if I think about the proportion of successes for variable one. That would be related to the row total for the success. Category And same thing, if I were thinking about the proportion of successes on variable 2, that would be related to the column total. For the success category for variable 2. The question is Are these two proportions the same? So is the proportion of successes on variable 1 the same as the proportion of successes on variable 2? Well, if I look at the proportion of successes for variable one. I know that the proportion for the row total. It will be equal to the sum of the two proportions in the cells, so it would be equal to the sum of those two proportions. Same thing with the column total. I know that those would also be equal to. The sum of. The two proportions in that first column in the cells. So you'll notice that both of these. Proportions have a piece of 11. And so if these values over here are the same. These values are the same, are the same, right? Um, then that means these values would also have to be the same. So that if you look at these off diagonal. Proportions those would have to be the same. For the proportion of successes in variable 1 to be the same as the proportion of successes in variable 2. McNamara's test then looks at whether these proportion of successes in uh variable one is the same as the proportion of successes in variable 2. And so the null hypothesis is that yep, those are the same. The alternative hypothesis is, no, those are different. And so we know that when we look at these two proportions being the same, that if the off-diagonal proportions or observations are the same, then that will clue us in that the proportions are the same. If those off-diagonal proportions or observations are very different from each other, then that's going to let us know that there's no way for the proportion of successes and variable one to be the same as the proportion of successes and variable 2. So if the null hypothesis is true, Um, those two, proportions are the same, and that implies that the two proportions for um the piece of I, sorry, of 12 and the piece of 21, that those proportions would also have to be the same. So we're going to compare the estimates of these two proportions. And so we would estimate um piece of 12 by taking the number of observations in the 12 cell, so Y of 12, and dividing by N. And we would also estimate P21 by doing the same thing, taking the number of observations in the Y21 cell and dividing by N. Well, since both of those values are divided by divided by the same number, comparing those proportions and their estimates is going to be like comparing the observations in those two cells. So we'll be comparing Y12. To Y2 1. And if I see large differences between those two values, that's indicating that these population proportions are not the same. And that then implies that the proportion of successes in variable 1 is not equal to the proportion of successes in variable 2. So the test statistic then is interested in looking at the difference. Between those two values. And we don't care if that difference is negative or positive, we just care how big it is, so we'll square it. And then we will divide by um the total number of observations in the diagonal cell, in the off-diagonal cells, excuse me. The larger the values of this X2 Z2 test statistic gets, the more that indicates that these two population proportions are not the same in the cells and therefore they're not the same same in the row total and column total. Now you'll notice this test statistic is Z2d. That's fairly common notation for McNamara's test, but it's not universal. Some people do use X2d, um, but I think Z2 is a little bit more common. Now, as long as the total number of observations in our off-diagonal cells is at least 20, then this X2d is well approximated by the chi square distribution, and it has one degree of freedom. So all MacNamara tests are based on chi square one. And so this will be a right tailed test. We will have our chi square one. Which is very skewed, and then we will have our X Z squared uh statistic. And since large values of that provide evidence against the null hypothesis, our P value will be the right tail. So let's go ahead and look at our example. Here is the data again. And so you can see in our off-diagonal values, we have 30. For one of them, and 12 for the other. So the total is 42. When we look at the null hypothesis, the null hypothesis is that the proportion of correct responses on question one is the same as the proportion of correct responses on question two. Um, the alternative is that they are not the same. My test statistic takes that 12 and 30, and takes the difference for the numerator. And takes the sum for the denominator. Total I get 7.714. For a chi square distribution with one degree of freedom. The probability of being greater than 7.714 is 0.0055. So we have a fairly small p-value. Most people kind of consider that as a very strong amount of evidence against the null hypothesis. And we have then that evidence for the alternative, which is that there is a difference in the proportion of students who correctly answer both questions. Now if we would actually at the end of McNamara's test decide that we do have strong evidence or very strong evidence or extremely strong evidence of a difference in these proportions, we might want to follow up with the how different are they question, and that would fall into a confidence interval. So our goal is to be able to calculate the confidence interval for the difference in these two proportions. But this is not the same as the difference in proportions that we talked about, um, in previous segments. This is. The difference between P Sub 1 and P1. So this is the difference in what we call marginal proportions. So I'll go ahead and estimate those marginal proportions, so I'll get the difference. So that's just looking at what is the proportion of observations in the first row, what's the proportion of observations in the first column. Now I need to calculate the standard error of that estimate. So we're estimating the difference in the sample proportions, the sample marginal proportions. And so the standard error formula is given as shown. The standard error formula, as you see, depends on the size of the off-diagonal values. Now, again, as long as the sum of the off-diagonal values is greater than are equal to 20. We can get a confidence interval by using the standard normal distribution. So the distribution of our estimate, the difference in those marginal proportions, that is well approximated by the standard normal. And so we can take our confidence interval and form it as we do many other confidence intervals by taking the difference in the two sample proportions, that is our um estimate. And then we will add and subtract the distribution information, the Z 1 minus alpha over 2, and then we'll multiply that by the standard error uh of the estimate. Some resources will use Z 1 minus alpha over 2, indicating that it is the 1 minus alpha 2 percentile of the normal distribution. Others will use Z alpha over 2, and then tell you that it's the upper alpha 2 percentile. Uh, both of those are the same. OK. So, um, we're talking about, uh, 95% being 1.96%, etc. All right, so. In our example, we can go ahead then and calculate, um, first, the difference in those observed proportion of successes for questions 1 and 2. So as you can see, question 1 had a smaller number of correct answers than question 2. And so the difference in the proportions is 0.0306 and since question one went first, it's negative. The standard error of the estimate turns out to be 0.0109. And so we end up with our confidence interval. of 0.0520. 2.0092. Both of those values are negative. So that's indicating to us that question one. Um, did not have a, uh, or had a lower proportion of correct responses than question two. And so we can go ahead and summarize what we've learned from our confidence interval. So we're 95% confident that the proportion of all of our introductory statistics students who answer correctly when asked to identify the horizontal axis. In a histogram is between 0.0092 and 0.0520 lower than the proportion of all stat 11 students who correctly answer when asked to identify the vertical axis in a histogram. This was surprising to me as our result, because the horizontal axis is the variable. And the vertical axis is the number of observations. So you would think if any of the axes would be, uh, would they would have difficulty with those, it would have been the horizontal axis, or it would have been the vertical axis, not the horizontal axis, but they had more difficulty with the horizontal axis. I don't know why. Sometimes research just opens up more questions.
