SPEAKER 0
In our previous segments in module 2, we have been working primarily with quantitative variables and looking at the differences in quantitative variables between different groups. In this section, we'll start looking at categorical variables, and so our interests will be in looking at the difference in a categorical variable, also between different groups. The groups come to us from another categorical variable, and so we'll start by learning how to describe two categorical variables together. The first thing that we'll talk about is something called a contingency table. Then we'll learn how to get marginal and conditional distributions from the contingency table, and then we'll look at something called a mosaic plot. Similar to how we've started in other segments in module 2, we'll first look at the different variables that we will be studying. We'll still have two variables, but now they'll both be categorical. Variable one will have the number of categories equal to I. And variable 2 will have its number of categories equal to J. Getting the data for this particular situation evolves from either one of two different collection processes. The first one is that we have a single sample from a single population. We have collected information about two categorical variables in our samples. The second situation is that we have multiple samples from multiple populations. We've collected data on one categorical variable. And the second categorical variable then becomes the information about the sample slash population membership. So here's a picture of the general uh variables and how they might look like in a data table. So we have variable one. Variable 1 here can be any one of three categories. And so you can see, uh, we have observations that have categories 12, and 3. For each one of our observations, we also have information about variable 2. Variable 2 can be any category of 123 or 4. And so we can see, for example, the first observation in our data table has category 1 as its value for variable 1, and Category 2 as its value for variable 2. Each of the observations in the data table then get two categories, one for variable 1 and one for variable 2. We will then take the information in the data table for these two categorical variables and do something called cross-classifying those observations. That is counting the number of observations in each combination. Of the two variables and their categories, and then we'll summarize those in something called a contingency table or a two-way table. In our contingency table, we will use the convention that variable one with its capital I categories is in the rows of the table. And that variable 2 with its capital J categories is in the columns of the table. Usually contingency tables include both row and column totals as a part of the display. However, when we look at contingency tables that are produced in different statistical packages, we have to look to see whether a table, uh, the total of the row and columns are included in the table or not. So here is an example of what a 3 by 4 contingency table would look like. It's 3 because there are 3 categories for variable 1, and it's 4 because there's 4 categories for variable 2. Each one of the cross-classified number of observations is Y, and then the subscripts refer to which category of the first variable and which category of the second variable. Are denote that particular observation. So for example, if we have Y sub 13. That will be the number of observations. In category one for variable one. And category 34 variable 2. Then you can see the row and column totals are included. The row totals are denoted by Y sub 1, and then a dot. The dot indicates that that particular subscript has been added over. The column totals are then Y. and then the 123 or 4, depending on which category it is. So here's some data for this particular segment. We have students in an introductory statistics course, and they were asked to select their eye and hair colors from dropdown menus. The eye color drop down menu gave them the options of blue. Hazel slash green, brown, and other. The hair color dropdown menu gave them the options of blonde, red, brown, black, and other. When we cross classified the 504 observations, you can see the number of students that had both, for example, blue eyes and blonde hair. That would be this here, so that would be 90 students. You can see the number of students who reported hazel slash green eyes and brown hair, that's 82. And you can see the number of students that reported blonde hair and another eye color, other than the 3 that were listed, um, that's 3. In looking at the contingency table then, we have some distributions that are within the contingency table that will help us in explaining and determining and understanding our categorical variables. The first one is called a marginal distribution. The marginal distributions are the distributions of the two categorical variables separately. They're called marginal distributions because the values that we would need for those distributions are included in the margins, the totals of the table. And so as you can see, our marginal distribution for variable one would be included in the row totals, and the marginal distribution for variable 2 would be included in the column totals. So when we look for the marginal distribution for variable one, again, we're looking for the row totals. So those are the counts, Y1. Y2. etc. And then those proportions would be those same values divided by the sample size N. The same thing for variable 2, those would be the column totals. So that would be capital Y.1 Y. 2, etc. And then the proportions would be those same values divided by the sample size n. So if we're looking at the marginal distributions for our data example, First, we can look at the marginal distribution for eye color. If we look at the values in the row totals, That will give us the different values, the number of observations for each one of those eye colors in the data set. And so as you can see, we have 197 reported blue eyes, 128 reported hazel slash green, etc. We can summarize the marginal distribution in a table, as you can see at the bottom of the slide, and so we can also summarize those proportions. I left those as fractions just so that you can see how those proportions are calculated. Usually we would go ahead and report those as a decimal value. We can also look at the marginal distribution of hair color, so that would be the column totals. And so you can see we had a total of 138 students report blonde hair, 21 report red. 296 report brown, etc. And so again, we can go ahead and summarize those uh values in the table as you see at the bottom of the slide. And each one of those to get the proportion then is divided by the 504 total number of observations. Now, when we're looking at our two categorical variables, we are usually interested in looking at their relationship. The relationship of the two categorical variables is summarized through these conditional distributions. A conditional distribution is the distribution of one of the categorical variables given a particular category for the other categorical variable. If you look at the given or conditioning variable, that will tell you whether to look at the rows or the columns. So for example, if we're conditioning on variable one, so that we are looking specifically at a category of variable one, then we're going to be looking for the row distributions. And so the row distributions will be summarized. With these values in the boxes. However, if we're conditioning on variable 2, so that we're looking at the distribution of variable 1, given a particular category of variable 2. Then we will be looking at the column distributions. And so we'll be looking at the values within those boxes. So this summarizes for a particular conditional distribution, what the observations, the counts, and the proportions would be. So when we're looking at the distribution of variable 2, given a category of variable 1, we will be looking in the rows of category I. And so the counts for that will be capital Y sub I1, Y sub I2, etc. The proportions then will be those counts, then divided by the total for that row in the table. That is capital Y sub i. Likewise, if we're looking at the distribution of variable one, given a particular category of variable 2, we will be looking at the values in that column that corresponds to category J. So the counts we'll be looking at are capital Y Y J. Or sorry, capital Y sub 1 J Y 2J, etc. And the proportions will be those same values then divided by the column total, and the column total then will be capital Y. J. So let's go ahead and look at our data examples and what some of the conditional distributions would be. So first, let's look at the conditional distribution of hair color given eye color. So that means we'll be looking at specific rows in the table. So for example, let's look at the row, eye color equals blue. In that row, we have that 90 students reported blonde. Hair 9 reported red, 96 reported brown, 1 reported black, and 1 reported another color. Out of the total then we had 197 students report having blue eyes. So if we look at the conditional distribution of hair color, given that eye color is blue, then we would report those 5 counts that are in the row, and then we would calculate the proportion by dividing by the row total or 197. Each one of the other eye colors, their conditional distributions of hair color given that eye color, works very much the same way. So here at the bottom, we see the conditional distribution of hair color, given eye color is reported to be hazel green. And so that is the values in the hazel green row in the contingency table. So you can see 36 reported blonde, 8 reported red, 82 reported brown, etc. We have 128 total, and so that 128 then becomes the denominator in our proportions. And likewise we can look at. The last one that really is of interest, um, our, uh, distribution of hair color given eye color is brown. And so that would correspond to. The brown row in the table. And you can see we have 9 reported blonde, 3 reported red, 115 reported brown, and 42 reported black. There was a total of 169 students who reported having brown eyes. And so that 169 then becomes the denominator in our proportions. We can look in the opposite direction, if you will, um, and look at the conditional distribution of eye color given a particular hair color. So here we have the distribution of eye color, given hair color is blonde. And so that would be the values in the blonde column in the contingency table. So you can see that they have reported um 90 blue eyes, 36 hazel green eyes, 9 brown eyes, and 3 other. There's a total of 138 students who reported having blonde hair, and so that 138 becomes the denominator in our proportions. And we can continue this pattern. We can look at the distribution of eye color for hair color equals red. So that will be this column. We can look at the distribution of eye color given hair color equals brown. So that will be those values in that column. And then finally, we can look at the distribution of eye color given hair color equals black. And that will be the values. In that column. Now, I did leave out uh the conditional distributions for other um in each variables case. Um, there aren't very many observations for that particular category, so I decided to to leave those off. Now one of the nice things to be able to do is to compare these different conditional distributions. So for example, if we look at the conditional distribution of eye color, given the different hair colors, what do those uh different distributions look like? How do they compare with each other? So when we're looking at it this way, we have these counts and these proportions. But when we have a really more than 2 of these distributions to compare, it's a little bit more difficult to do that um just by looking at tables of numbers. Even for comparing the three distributions given the eye colors, the distribution of hair colors, as we had back here, we have our eye color equals blue, and then we have the distribution of hair color. We can compare the eye color equals blue to what it is when eye color equals hazel green. To what it is when eye color equals brown. And we can kind of study those different values and look to see how they compare, but it is much easier. To have a graphical representation and look at that in order to compare these conditional distributions. One of the ways that we do that is with a plot called a mosaic plot. A mosaic plot takes one set of these conditional distributions, so it makes one of the variables be given um the conditioning variable, and then it makes the other variable um the maybe variable of interest, let's call it. Mosaic plots, in addition to showing the graphical representation of one set of these conditional distributions, will also include representation for the marginal distribution of at least the conditioning variable. Some mosaic plots will also include the marginal distribution for the variable of interest as well. These mosaic plots are put together by first having a stack for each category of the conditioning variable. And the width of the stack then represents the marginal distribution for that conditioning variable. Then within the stack, you have a color for each one of the categories of the variable of interest. And the height of that color in the stack then represents the proportion of observations in that category in our conditional distribution. So let's take a look at the mosaic plot for our data that we have on eye and hair color. The first example here then makes the um. Makes the uh given to be the um hair color. And so our stacks then are for blonde hair, red hair, brown hair, black hair, and other. And you can see that the relative width of those stacks is different, and that does correspond to their proportions from the marginal distributions. Then within each stack is the proportion. From that conditional distribution. So for example, we see in the blonde stack that there is a large proportion. Of blue eyes. And so if you remember from the data, and I'll go back to that in just a second, um, but that was blue eyes was more than half of the reported eye colors for people who reported having blonde hair. And then you can see the proportion of blonde haired people who reported hazel eyes, um, who reported brown eyes, and reported other color. Now you'll notice that these stacks are different for each one of the hair colors. So for example, for the brown hair color. There's a much smaller proportion that reported blue eyes and a much larger comparative proportion that reported brown eyes. And so we can see visually the difference in these conditional distributions through this mosaic plot. Now in this particular mosaic plot, we conditioned on hair color, so we made the hair color of the stacks, and then the variable of interest was eye color, and then those were how we built the stacks within each hair color. We can flip that. And we can look at the mosaic plot of hair color given eye color. So in that case, the stacks then become the eye colors, blue, hazel green, brown, and other. And then you can see the differences in the hair colors between each one of those reported eye colors. So you can see um when we have both hazel. Um Green eyes. And brown eyes, we have a much larger proportion of brown. OK. When we have brown eyes. Um, we have a much larger proportion of people saying black hair versus the other two, hazel green and blonde. There's a very, very small proportion that report having black, um, black hair. And then you can see for blue eyes or for blue, yeah, for um within blue eyes, there's a much larger proportion that report blonde hair um versus um any of the other. Eye colors. So this gives us a way of taking the values that we had. In our conditional distributions. And being able to then visually compare these proportions from these conditional distributions. And so Rather than um trying to look for in this example at 3 sets of tables of numbers. Or in this example of 4 different sets of tables of numbers, we can instead summarize those with the mosaic plot. And once you kind of get used to how to read a mosaic plot, it can be very helpful in looking at different relationships that we see with our two categorical variables. And so we'll be looking at mosaic plots periodically as we work through the remaining segments of this particular module.
